
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
UTAH STATEWIDE 
ELK MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UTAH DIVISION OF WILDLIFE RESOURCES 
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES

===== PAGE 2 =====
1 
 
UTAH DIVISION OF WILDLIFE RESOURCES 
STATEWIDE MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR ELK 
 
 
I. PURPOSE OF THE PLAN  
 
A. General  
 
The statewide elk management plan provides overall guidance and direction for Utah’s elk 
management program. This plan briefly describes general information on elk natural history, 
management, habitat, and population status. This statewide elk management plan was revised by 
a 20 person advisory committee. The committee was diverse and had representation from: the 
Utah Wildlife Board, five Regional Advisory Councils, Brigham Young University, Rocky 
Mountain Elk Foundation, Sportsmen for Fish and Wildlife, Utah Archery Association, US 
Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, Utah Farm Bureau, Cooperative Wildlife 
Management Unit Association, Utah Guides and Outfitters, private landowners, livestock 
permittees, public at large, and Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (DWR). This group met 
eight times from April 7 to August 17, 2022. The committee identified components of the last elk 
plan that were working well and areas that could be improved upon, and then evaluated goals 
and objectives and developed new strategies to address those management issues. 
 
B. Dates Covered  
 
The elk plan was approved by the Wildlife Board on December 1, 2022 and will be in effect for 
10 years until December 2032. Two mid-plan reviews spaced 3-4 years apart will be scheduled 
with the Wildlife Board in the spring of 2026. 
 
II. SPECIES ASSESSMENT  
  
A. Natural History  
 
Elk (Cervus elaphus) are members of the cervid family along with deer, moose, and caribou. 
Elk are the same species as European red deer, even though visually they are quite different. 
North American elk are also commonly called wapiti to distinguish them from European red 
deer. Wapiti is the Shawnee name for elk and means “white rump” or “white deer.”  There are 
six recognized subspecies of elk in North America with all of the elk in Utah of the subspecies 
known as Rocky Mountain elk (C. e. nelsoni). In 1971, the Rocky Mountain elk was designated 
as Utah’s state animal.  
 
Elk males, females, and young are known as bulls, cows, and calves, respectively. Calves are 
generally born as singles (twins are extremely rare) after a gestation period of approximately 8–
8.5 months. Calves are normally born mid-May through mid-June and typically weigh between 
33-45 pounds at birth. Elk are gregarious animals and, as such, often gather into large nursery 
bands of cows and calves in early summer. During this time, it is common to see groups of 
several hundred elk. Within a few weeks, those nursery bands disperse into smaller groups across 
the summer range.  
===== PAGE 3 =====
2 
 
 
The antlers of bulls begin to grow as soon as the old antlers are shed in late winter or early 
spring. Bulls generally segregate from cows and calves through the summer antler growing 
period and often band together in small groups during this time. The velvet that covers and 
provides nourishment to the growing antlers begins to shed in early August. In Utah, the rut or 
breeding period for elk begins in early September and continues through early October with the 
peak of the rut typically occurring in mid to late September. In early September, bulls begin to 
bugle and gather cows into harems of approximately 10–20 females. Breeding bulls vigorously 
defend their harems from other “satellite” bulls who attempt to steal cows for themselves.  
 
After the rut, bulls leave the cows and calves and either become reclusive or band together with 
other bulls. It is common to see large groups of bulls in the late fall and winter. In late spring, 
cows seek solitude for calving. At this time, yearlings from the previous year are often 
aggressively driven away by the cows and forced to find new home ranges. As new calves are 
born, the cycle of life begins again.  
 
B. Management   
 
1. DWR Regulatory Authority 
 
The Utah Division of Wildlife Resources operates under the authority granted by the Utah 
Legislature in Title 23 of the Utah Code. The Division was created and established as the 
wildlife authority for the state under section 23-14-1 of the Code. This Code also vests the 
Division with necessary functions, powers, duties, rights, and responsibilities associated with 
wildlife management within the state. Division duties are to protect, propagate, manage, 
conserve, and distribute protected wildlife throughout the state. 
 
2. Past and Current Management 
 
Elk along with bighorn sheep were probably the most common game animals in Utah prior to 
settlement times. Native Americans, trappers, and pioneers all used elk as a source of food and 
clothing. Unrestricted hunting eliminated most of the elk in Utah by the end of the nineteenth 
century. Because of the low elk numbers, elk hunting seasons were closed in Utah in 1898.   
 
Large scale transplant efforts are a major reason for the reestablishment of elk in Utah. Interstate 
transplants of elk occurred from 1912 to 1925 to reestablish elk to their historical ranges. During 
that period, elk were transplanted from Yellowstone National Park and released on the Fishlake, 
Oquirrh Mountains, Mount Timpanogos, Mount Nebo, Logan Canyon, and Manti units. A few 
elk were also captured from Montana and released in Smithfield Canyon during that period. In 
addition to the interstate transplant efforts, elk have also been captured and transplanted to and 
from source herds within Utah. Those transplants occurred in the late 1970s and 1980s and were 
mainly released on the eastern and southern Utah mountain ranges.   
 
Elk herds in Utah were managed by the Board of Big Game Control from 1925 until 1996. In 
1996, the Board of Big Game Control was abolished and replaced with five Regional Advisory 
Councils and a Wildlife Board that regulate the management of all wildlife in Utah.  
===== PAGE 4 =====
3 
 
 
Elk were hunted under a limited entry hunting system until 1967 when the Board of Big Game 
Control adopted an “open bull” hunt strategy on most large elk units. Smaller elk units continued 
to be managed as “restricted permit” or “limited entry” type hunts. That hunting strategy 
continued until 1989 when a “yearling only” regulation was initiated on the two largest elk herds, 
the Manti and Fishlake. Yearling only was later replaced with a “spike only” regulation and 
expanded to other units.  
 
Elk herds in Utah are currently managed under a combination of general season (spike and any 
bull) and limited entry hunting regulations. The any bull units are located primarily in northern 
Utah and are generally on units with large amounts of private land, large wilderness areas, or 
units with very low elk populations (Figure 1). Spike hunting is used on most limited entry units 
(Figure 2) and is intended to reduce bull:cow ratios, while still allowing for trophy quality bulls. 
Any bull and spike hunts are designed to provide hunting opportunity. In 2022, DWR issued 
over 47,000 general season permits including 17,500 adult any bull, more than 2,200 youth any 
bull, 15,000 spike, and more than 12,700 archery permits. The harvest rate on these general 
season elk hunts is fairly low, with success rates in 2021 averaging 15.5% across all general 
season elk hunts (5,755 elk harvested by 37,211 hunters afield). Archery hunters recorded the 
lowest success rates (11.4%) whereas hunters that purchased multi-season tags, allowing them to 
hunt during multiple seasons, experienced the highest success rates (multi-season spike only 
22.9%, multi-season any bull 28.2%). 
 
Traditional limited entry hunting units/area are managed for an average age of harvested bulls 
(Figure 3, Table 1). Those age objectives are based on the premise that to achieve a given 
average age of harvest, a certain age structure and number of bulls must be present in the 
population. The higher the age class objective, the more the age structure will be shifted towards 
older animals, and as such, the greater the likelihood of a hunter harvesting a larger trophy 
animal. There is a strong correlation between age and antler size in bull elk, but only to a certain 
age. Large data sets analyzing antler size (measured via Boone and Crockett score) on bulls that 
have been aged using cementum annuli show that average maximum antler size for bulls is about 
320” Boone and Crockett (B&C), and most bull have achieved 96% of their antler growth 
potential by 6.5 years old (Figure 4, Freeman et al. 2013).  Data comparing age and main beam 
antler length for elk harvested in Utah show similar trends with 97% of length being achieved by 
6.5 years old and length not increasing after an elk reaches 8.5 years old (Figure 5).   
 
Based on these data and analyses, the elk plan committee and DWR made the decision to lower 
age objectives on some units in order to give more opportunity to hunt while still maintaining 
large antlered bulls. Lowering age objectives, especially on the highest age classes, will give 
more opportunity to hunt and large antlered bulls will still be available on the landscape. It may 
be more challenging for hunters to locate, hunt, and harvest large bulls, but the tradeoff of 
increasing hunting opportunity by increasing hunting challenge while still maintaining “quality” 
bulls was a major theme for the 2022 elk committee.  By lowering age objectives by one year, 
hunting opportunity can be increased by 40-50%, assuming stable populations (UDWR, 
unpublished data).   
 
 
===== PAGE 5 =====
4 
 
C. Habitat  
 
Elk are a generalist ungulate and have a varied diet consisting of grasses, forbs, and shrubs. The 
percentage of each food type can vary based on availability. This flexible diet allows elk to live 
in a variety of habitat types including Utah’s mountains as well as some of the low deserts 
(Figure 6). Although elk inhabit most habitat types in Utah, they prefer to spend their summers at 
high elevations in aspen conifer forests. Elk will spend the winter months at mid to low-elevation 
habitats that contain mountain shrub and sagebrush communities.  
 
Elk in Utah are more closely tied to aspen than any other habitat type. Aspen stands provide both 
forage and cover for elk during the summer months and are used for calving in spring. For 
several decades, aspen has been declining throughout the West from lack of disturbance (e.g., 
logging, fire), extended drought, and overgrazing all being listed as potential reasons for the 
decline. If declines in aspen communities continue, it will reduce the amount of suitable habitat 
available for elk and, as such, reduce the number of elk those habitats can support.    
 
Water is an important component of elk habitat, and lack of sufficient water distribution limits 
the number and distribution of elk in Utah. In Utah, Jeffrey (1963) found that elk on summer 
range preferred areas within 0.33 miles of a permanent water source. Other studies have shown 
elk use of summer range declined markedly beyond 0.5 mile from water (Mackie 1970, Nelson 
and Burnell 1975). 
 
D. Population Status  
 
Elk are well established throughout Utah with the current statewide population estimated at 
approximately 84,390 animals (Figure 7). From 1975 to 1990, the elk population in Utah grew 
rapidly from an estimated 18,000 elk to 58,000 elk (average annual growth rate = 1.08). This 
rapid increase was largely due to low population levels and the abundance of available habitat 
(i.e., the population was well below carrying capacity). After 1990, population growth slowed 
down considerably through the use of antlerless harvest designed to reduce population growth 
rates, as well as reduce populations in areas with poor range conditions due to drought. Elk 
populations have held relatively steady during the last 10 years and most units are currently at or 
near the population objective (Table 2).  
 
E. Recent Research  
 
Utah actively monitors elk populations around the state and conducts research to improve 
management of this species. Recent efforts have focused on use of GPS collars to understand 
habitat use, movements, and survival of elk in several management units. For these projects, 
biologists capture elk each winter, conduct a general health assessment (e.g., measurement of 
animal condition via ultrasonography, pregnancy, etc.), and then fit elk with a GPS collar prior to 
release. GPS collars provide real-time data on habitat use, movements, and survival. When 
collared elk die, UDWR biologists and partners with universities and other agencies are notified 
via email. This notification provides us with data on the location and timing of each mortality, 
and also allows us to quickly investigate each mortality to determine probable cause of death.  
===== PAGE 6 =====
5 
 
By understanding why animals are dying, we can determine what is likely limiting populations 
and direct management to help alleviate the issues.   
  
1. Survival 
 
Annual survival of adult (≥ 1.5 years of age) female elk is generally high in Utah with the 
predominant source of mortality being hunter harvest.  On the Wasatch and surrounding 
management units, annual survival of adult female elk ranged between 75 and 81 percent when 
harvest was included, but in the absence of harvest by humans, annual survival rates were much 
higher ranging between 93 and 98 percent (Figure 8, Sergeyev et al. 2021). In this study, over 21 
percent of collared elk were killed by hunters with just 4 percent killed by mountain lions and 
less than 2 percent succumbing to disease, pregnancy complications, collisions with vehicles, or 
undetermined causes (Sergeyev et al. 2021).  In an analysis of adult elk survival across several 
western states, Brodie et al. (2013) also found high adult survival in the absence of hunting with 
baseline survival estimates ranging from 93 to 95%.   
 
Survival of neonate elk during their first year of life is much lower and averaged between 41 and 
47 percent on the Book Cliffs management unit (Figure 9, Turnley et al. 2022). Neonate elk in 
the Book Cliffs were subject to predation by multiple predators, but mountain lions were 
responsible for the majority of deaths. Up to 45 percent of collared calves during their first year 
of life were killed by cougars in the Book Cliffs (Figure 10, Turnley et al. 2022).  
 
Studies are currently underway to estimate survival of male and female yearling elk (from year 
1.5 to 2.5 years old) in Utah.   
 
2. Pregnancy 
 
Pregnancy in elk is highly variable, differing across years and units (Figure 11 and Figure 12).  
During winter (January-February) captures in Utah, we have tested adult female elk for 
pregnancy using blood tests and ultrasonography.  Based on these data, average adult pregnancy 
rates have been 85% with a range from 55% to 100%.  Recent research on the Book Cliffs 
indicated pregnancy rates of elk are highly correlated with body condition of females, age, and 
calving status from the previous year.  For body condition, pregnant females had greater amounts 
of rump fat at the time of capture than non-pregnant females (Figure 13).  For age, females >12 
years old were less likely to be pregnant than younger females (Figure 14).  Lastly, energetic 
investment into a calf in the current year, determined by a lactation score at the time of capture, 
was a strong predictor of pregnancy status in the subsequent year. Females with high lactation 
scores in late winter, indicating they had nursed a calf in the months preceding, were less likely 
to be pregnant. This relationship interacted with age and was stronger in older females (>12 
years) than for younger females (2-12 years).  Lactation comes at a high energetic cost to female 
elk, with nursing calves gaining a pound or more a day between birth and six months of age. This 
display of reproductive pause appears to be a strategy to restore energy reserves spent in the 
previous year. Further research to understand how habitat quality influences this finding has been 
set to begin in 2023.   
 
 
===== PAGE 7 =====
6 
 
3. Age Structure  
 
Elk are a long-lived ungulate with an average lifespan of 10-13 years in hunted populations. 
However, cementum analysis has confirmed elk living into their late twenties in some parts of 
the state. Due to high natural survival of adults, the greatest limiting factor of populations in 
Utah is recruitment of individuals. Population growth is contingent on both production and 
survival of calves in a given year. Based on the relationship found between age and pregnancy 
rates on the Book Cliffs, maximum reproductive potential of a herd is achieved by maintaining a 
younger age structure. Younger females are more likely to be in good condition, which translates 
to higher pregnancy rates and greater investment into offspring. Previous research indicates these 
maternal effects in ungulates influence both birthweight and survival of neonates. Maintenance 
of a younger age structure within a population is crucial to both growth and stability of the herd.  
 
4. Elk Distribution 
 
Distribution of elk on the landscape is fundamental because effective management of population 
size is dependent on elk being on public land and vulnerable to harvest during the hunting 
seasons. Distribution of elk shifts among seasons in a predictable manner and is strongly 
influenced by hunting pressure (Sergeyev et al., 2022). Based on data from elk located on the 
Wasatch and surrounding management units, there is an annual cycle where the majority (~75%) 
of elk are residing on public land during summer, whereas the majority of elk (~65%) reside on 
private land during late-winter. This pattern is likely due to the juxtaposition of public and 
private land; public land is typically higher in elevation and susceptible to deep snow during late-
winter. Interestingly, there is typically a marked (10-15% of the entire population) shift in 
distribution from public land to private land associated with the opening day of the rifle elk 
season (Sergeyev et al. 2022). In an effort to 1) facilitate effective management of elk, 2) provide 
landowners with tools to manage elk on private property, and 3) to provide public hunters with 
greater opportunity for success, the UDWR implemented an over-the-counter opportunity to 
purchase a private-lands-only antlerless elk permit in 2016. The implementation of the private-
lands-only hunt dramatically reduced the exodus of elk from public lands during the rifle season 
and effectively enabled owners of private land to manage elk on their properties. 
5. Movement 
Understanding patterns of movement and its influences are crucial to the management of elk. To 
better understand this behavior, over 500 elk were tracked on the Wasatch unit via GPS 
collaring. The objectives of the study were to determine the factors that influence timing and 
distance of movement as well as identify landscape features that serve as barriers to movement. 
Elk are known to be highly migratory animals. The timing and distance of migration can be 
highly variable in this species, with individuals beginning winter migration anywhere from 
September to February. In an analysis of environmental factors, it was found that annual 
maximum snow depth, a component of the Winter Severity Index, had a significant impact on 
determination of annual migration distance of elk. Snow depth, however, did not appear to 
influence the proportion of migratory individuals within a herd. Within the scope of this 
research, landscape features used to delineate hunt unit boundaries were analyzed in relation to 
elk movement. It was found that major roads and large ridgelines serve as barriers to movement, 
resulting in elk crossing these barriers less often than they would use other parts of the 
===== PAGE 8 =====
7 
 
landscape. This specific research validates the use of major landscape features including major 
roads and ridgelines as appropriate boundary lines for hunt units, and provides a guideline for 
future hunt boundary delineations, as there is decreased movement across these features 
compared to the rest of the landscape. 
6. Future Research 
 
In order to further understand the movement, survival, and behavior of elk, future research plans 
have been put in place in southern and central Utah.  A neonate survival study will take place on 
the Central Mountains, Nebo unit beginning Spring of 2023.  This study, occurring on a highly 
productive unit, will serve as a benchmark of comparison for the results produced from the Book 
Cliffs study, which occurred on a low production unit.  Combined, these data will improve 
understanding of parturition behavior and calf survival across an array of environmental and herd 
conditions.  In addition to this study, a second study is planned to begin in Southern Utah in 
winter of 2023, where more than 100 elk will be collared from the Boulder, Fishlake, Monroe, 
and Mt. Dutton units to determine the proportion of wintering elk that segregate on to each 
respective summer range.  This study will additionally provide information surrounding summer 
range fidelity by both age and sex.  In recent years (2020-present), GPS collars have been 
deployed on six-month-old elk calves on the Book Cliffs and Cache (Hardware Ranch) units.  
Collaring calves at this life stage will provide information surrounding survival of elk calves 
from six months to 1.5 years of age by producing data surrounding survival by sex, cause of 
mortality, and timing of mortality.  The collar data will also help identify dispersal rates by sex 
and the factors influencing dispersal.  Collaring efforts of six-month-old elk calves are planned 
to continue in future years to provide an adequate sample size for the analyses.  
 
III. ISSUES AND CONCERNS  
 
A. Habitat  
 
Healthy and productive elk herds require large areas of high quality habitat. Crucial elk habitat 
has been and continues to be fragmented or lost to human expansion and development. 
Urbanization, road construction, OHV use, and energy development impact elk habitat. Proper 
planning and mitigation are essential to maintaining and improving elk habitat and migration 
routes. Elk summer ranges, such as aspen communities have been gradually changed over time 
by encroaching conifers due to fire suppression. Elk winter ranges once dominated by shrubs and 
perennial grasses have been replaced by annual grasses and invasive weeds drastically limiting 
the benefit to elk.  
 
The DWR has a long history of restoring and enhancing elk habitat in Utah. The DWR habitat 
section, Habitat Council, Utah Watershed Restoration Initiative, and many conservation partners 
have provided leadership and funding to improve elk habitats. These projects include pinyon-
juniper removal, controlled burns, wildfire rehabilitation and reseeding efforts, conifer thinning, 
etc., which has established more perennial grasses, forbs, and shrubs that benefit elk and other 
wildlife. Water catchments (i.e., guzzlers) and other water developments have been installed in 
Utah, aiding elk, cattle, and other big game species. Since 2005, DWR and our partners have 
treated 1,370,000 acres of elk habitat (870,000 acres of habitat improvement projects and  
 
===== PAGE 9 =====
8 
 
500,000 acres of fire rehabilitation). These restoration efforts will continue to support elk 
populations and their habitats throughout the state. 
 
B. Population Size and Elk Distribution  
 
The statewide elk management plan does not set a population objective for elk in Utah; rather, 
population objectives are established in unit plans and the summation of those objectives 
becomes the statewide objective. The current population objective for elk statewide is 78,990 
(Table 2). Local committees or other forms of public input are used when changing a 
population objective for a given unit. Population estimates are obtained by conducting aerial 
surveys every 3 years as snow conditions and budgets allow. Population models include data on 
bull and cow harvest, survival, and calf production, are also used to estimate elk populations for 
a given unit in the absence of surveys and are updated annually.  
 
Properly managing the distribution and number of elk within units is a key priority for DWR. 
In most units, managing to a population objective is easily attained by issuing antlerless elk 
permits to public hunters. However, in some units, particularly those with large quantities of 
private or tribal lands, managing to the population objective has been challenging because elk 
quickly learn to use sanctuary or refuge areas that receive little hunting pressure during hunting 
seasons (Mangus 2009, Sergeyev et al. 2022). To counter undesirable distribution, the DWR 
has reduced the number of antlerless elk permits available in the public draw and issued more 
private-lands-only antlerless elk permits. This change has resulted in improved elk distribution 
(Sergeyev et al. 2022), but has also decreased public cow hunting opportunities. One focus for 
this plan is to find ways to increase public antlerless elk hunting opportunities by making 
antlerless elk hunting more surgical and strategic. This effort is designed to minimize or avoid 
negatively changing elk distribution while still maintaining effective tools for managers and 
landowners to address conflicts. 
 
C. Bull Hunting  
 
This plan provides for opportunity and quality bull elk hunting in Utah. Opportunity hunts 
include general season spike only and any bull elk permits. Spike only harvest assists in 
managing high bull-to-cow ratios on units managed for limited entry bull units and can increase 
herd productivity.  Spike harvest can result in increased calf production in future years because 
more cows can be retained in the population.  Spike hunting occurs on most limited entry units, 
whereas any bull hunting typically occurs on units with lots of refugia for bulls (e.g., areas with 
large tracts of private lands, units with low elk populations/densities, wilderness areas or other 
large refuge areas such as tribal lands or national parks/monuments).  
 
Limited entry bull hunts are designed for increased quality and older bulls with larger antlers. 
On traditional limited entry units, harvested bulls are managed to a desired age objective 
(Figure 3). The elk committee evaluated the current age objectives in the context of demand, 
point creep and success rates and made some changes to result in more opportunity to hunt 
mature bulls while still maintaining quality in the form of large antlered bulls. Based on antler 
size and age datasets, the 7.5-8.0 year age objective was eliminated and replaced with a 6.5-7.0 
year old objective. The 6.5-7.0 objective was replaced with a 6.0-6.5 average age of harvest 
===== PAGE 10 =====
9 
 
objective. The 5.5-6.0 units typically hold large elk populations and seem to be a good balance 
of presenting a challenging opportunity to harvest a large bull along with more reasonable 
drawing odds, and this objective was unchanged. Most of the units managed in the 4.5-5.0 
objective were not functioning well and that age objective has been eliminated. (Table 1).  
 
Some units classified as “underperforming” during the mid-plan review of 2020 were identified, 
and bulls on those units/areas were hunted using a different strategy focused on primitive 
weapons to provide quality hunting experiences, where hunters are likely to be less selective 
and have lower success due to the limited range of the allowed weapons. These primitive 
weapon limited entry units utilize a month-long September archery hunt followed by another 
primitive weapons hunt that allows the use of handgun, archery, muzzleloader, shotgun with no 
optical sights. These are defined in rule as HAMS hunts (R657-5-48) and were intended to 
provide increased limited entry hunting opportunities. The HAMS hunts had mixed results and 
many of the units or areas that had been managed as HAMS have been converted to an any bull 
hunting strategy. The high demand for any bull hunting opportunities, coupled with the low 
demand for HAMS hunts, led to HAMS applications making up only 1% of limited entry elk 
applications in 2022.  Because of the disproportionate demand, the committee and DWR 
concluded that most of these units would be better utilized if managed for any bull hunting. The 
remaining HAMS units will continue to be managed in ways that use HAMS and/or other forms 
of restricted weapon technology to optimize hunting opportunities. 
 
D. Poaching  
 
Poaching is not considered to be a major problem in Utah; however, it is extremely difficult to 
determine the true extent to which elk are being poached in the state. Although poaching has not 
resulted in overall declines in elk population numbers in Utah, poaching of mature bulls can be 
significant and has reduced hunter opportunity in some localized areas. Units that are most 
susceptible to poaching typically have small isolated elk populations and issue very few bull elk 
permits. High grading of bulls may also be occurring on some units where hunters kill one bull 
elk and then abandon it to look for a larger bull. Continued law enforcement efforts are needed to 
maintain hunting opportunities in Utah.  
 
E. Predator Management  
 
Utah’s elk populations have increased dramatically since 1970 even with the presence of several 
predator species (e.g., mountain lion, black bear, and coyote). Survival analysis of adult cow elk 
on the Wasatch Unit and surrounding areas indicate that cougars account for 3.7% of annual elk 
mortality, and these predators typically target smaller elk in poor body condition (Sergeyev et al. 
2021). Although mountain lions may display strong patterns of selection for elk calves (Clark et 
al. 2014, Turnley et al. 2002), along with black bears and coyotes that occasionally prey on elk, 
there are no known instances of predators causing elk herd declines in Utah.  Predator 
management occurs in some elk herd units due to declining or depressed mule deer populations 
on shared ranges, and also occurs when deer herds are chronically below population objectives 
(UDWR 2020a). In some instances, elk herds may have benefited by this predator management 
that was initiated for deer and other ungulate species.  
 
===== PAGE 11 =====
10 
 
Although wolves are not currently established in Utah, there is concern that wolves could 
impact elk populations and elk hunting opportunities. Recent studies in surrounding western 
states have implicated predation by wolves as a reason for localized elk herd declines, 
particularly in areas with poor to marginal habitat quality (Hamlin and Cunningham 2009). To 
deal with the potential establishment of wolves in Utah, DWR in conjunction with the Wolf 
Working Group developed a wolf management plan that was approved by the Utah Wildlife 
Board in 2005 and mostly recently reviewed and revised in 2020 (DWR 2020b).  
 
F. Disease  
 
Similar to other wild ungulates, elk are susceptible to a wide variety of viral, bacterial, parasitic 
and prion diseases. In Utah, the two most concerning diseases include brucellosis (Brucella 
abortus) and chronic wasting disease (CWD). Other diseases and parasites either documented or 
considered a concern to elk include bluetongue virus (BTV), epizootic hemorrhagic disease 
(EHD), and arterial worm (Elaeophora schneideri).  
 
Brucellosis is an infectious bacterial disease that causes late term abortions, non-viable calves, 
and sterility (Godfroid et al, 2011). Transmission most commonly occurs when an animal licks 
or ingests infected fetal materials, aborted fetuses, uterine discharges, or contaminated feed or 
water (Godfroid et al., 2011). Depending on environmental conditions, such as cool temperatures 
and moisture, the bacteria can remain viable in uterine discharges and the aborted fetus for 
prolonged periods of time (Crawford et al. 1990). Brucellosis is thought to be self-limiting in 
free-ranging elk populations because of their secretive nature during parturition and the fact that 
most female elk quickly consume fetal materials after birth (Thorne 2001). However, this has not 
been the case for elk of the Greater Yellowstone area where feed ground practices that cause elk 
to concentrate elk during a time period when abortions are most likely to occur. The herd 
concentrations may have allowed the disease to persist and increase in prevalence (Thorne 2001). 
This finding has also been reported in Idaho, where the prevalence of brucellosis antibodies is 
two to four times higher in elk that use feed grounds (Etter and Drew 2006). 
 
Although brucellosis is not present in Utah, the proximity and potential exchange of elk in Utah 
with possible brucellosis positive elk from Wyoming or Idaho has caused concern. In response, 
the DWR has been monitoring for the disease in elk at Hardware Ranch on an annual basis since 
1969. Hunter harvested antlerless elk from Rich and Cache counties are also tested through a 
voluntary participation program. In addition, the DWR has deployed hundreds of GPS collars on 
elk across northern Utah, southeastern Idaho, and southwestern Wyoming to monitor movements 
and potential comingling with infected herds in neighboring states. To date, no elk in the state of 
Utah has ever been classified as a suspect or reactor (DWR unpublished data).  
 
CWD is a contagious, slow-acting, and fatal degenerative disease known to affect members of 
the cervid family including elk (Williams and Young 1982, Miller et al. 1998, Miller et al. 2000, 
Williams et al. 2002). CWD affects the central nervous system, resulting in weight loss, 
deterioration of body condition, and eventual death (Williams and Young 1982, Williams and 
Young 1992, Spraker et al. 1997, Williams et al. 2002). CWD was first documented in Utah in a 
hunter-harvested mule deer in late 2002 and has since been found in the North Slope and South 
===== PAGE 12 =====
11 
 
Slope, Nine Mile, La Sal Mountains, San Juan, Central Mountains, and most recently on the East 
Canyon unit on the north end of Salt Lake City.  
 
Surveillance for CWD in Utah includes hunter-harvest sampling in areas known to have positive 
mule deer and targeted surveillance focusing on the removal of sick or symptomatic animals.  To 
date, three elk have tested positive for CWD in Utah: two hunter harvested elk (La Sal 
Mountains 2009, South Slope 2021) and one female elk with neurological symptoms that was 
euthanized by DWR personnel in 2014 near Vernal, Utah. CWD has also been detected in 
privately owned captive cervids in Utah, which could present additional challenges in managing 
the disease.  Chronic Wasting Disease in captive cervid facilities are of great concern to the 
health of Utah’s wild elk. Licensing and CWD surveillance on captive elk ranches is overseen by 
the Utah Department of Agriculture and Food (UDAF), but the responsibility for removal of wild 
cervids within the ranches lies with DWR. Close collaboration with UDAF and enforcement of 
existing regulations is critical to prevent the spread of CWD from captive elk ranches.  
 
G. Access Management  
 
The use of off highway vehicles (OHVs) in Utah has dramatically increased in recent years. 
OHV registrations increased more than 3-fold from 1998 to 2006, from 51,686 to 172,231 
(Smith 2008) and OHV use remains popular with over 180,000 OHV registrations recorded in 
2021 (Utah State Tax Commission data). Uncontrolled use of OHVs can cause damage to elk 
habitat and disturbance to elk during critical phases of their life cycle. Shed antler gathering and 
the associated human disturbance on crucial winter ranges, especially with the use of OHVs, can 
cause undue stress on elk during a time when they must conserve energy. State and federal land 
management agencies are currently struggling with issues involving the use of OHVs on public 
land. Those agencies acknowledge OHVs as a legitimate use of public land, but also recognize 
the potential problems associated with uncontrolled activity. As such, these agencies have 
developed or are currently working on travel management plans to help minimize the impact of 
OHVs on wildlife and their habitat.     
 
H. Depredation  
 
Depredation of private croplands continues to exist in some areas despite careful management of 
elk populations.  In some localized areas depredation can be a significant problem.  DWR has 
committed substantial resources to address depredation concerns, and there are numerous 
programs designed to assist landowners with depredation situations.  Harvesting elk on private 
lands can ease frustrations of private landowners and better distribute elk into more favorable 
portions of a unit.  In the last elk plan cycle, the implementation of private-lands-only antlerless 
elk permits proved to be very effective for addressing conflicts on private lands.  These permits 
are available on a first come, first served over the counter basis for units/areas and typically have 
long season dates from August 1 through January 31. This gives lots of flexibility to landowners 
to use hunting to remove animals doing damage and the associated hunting pressure to 
redistribute elk.  
 
Depredation issues will continue to be addressed within the sideboards of state code, rule, and 
policy. Biologists and landowners will strive to find innovative solutions and tools to reduce 
===== PAGE 13 =====
12 
 
conflicts in a timely and efficient manner to help landowners better tolerate migratory 
populations of elk. Landowners and wildlife managers need effective tools to address elk that 
establish resident populations in and adjacent to low-elevation private agricultural lands. 
 
I. Private Lands 
 
Private lands provide valuable habitat to elk. Many crucial elk habitats throughout the state are 
privately owned, and some of those private rangelands have been converted to housing 
developments, recreational properties, or other uses that result in a loss of elk habitat. As such, 
programs that provide incentives for private landowners to manage their properties to benefit elk 
and other wildlife species (e.g., CWMU, LOA) are essential to the success of the state’s elk 
management program.  In some areas of the state, obtaining adequate cow harvest on private 
lands has been challenging and reviewing current incentive programs and additional 
management options will be necessary as elk management challenges continue to evolve. 
Additionally, the Utah Watershed Restoration Initiative has worked with numerous cooperating 
landowners to provide funding and other resources to accomplish vegetation treatments on both 
private and public lands to benefit elk and other wildlife species, as well as livestock.  
 
J. Winter Feeding  
 
Supplemental feeding is often viewed by the public as a viable solution to a lack of suitable 
winter range.  However, there is evidence that the potential harm created by feeding elk may 
outweigh the limited benefits (WAFWA 2013). Winter feeding programs are costly and can 
cause problems for elk including behavioral changes, range destruction, and expansion of 
disease problems.  Research conducted in Utah has shown that elk feeding programs in Utah 
can be reduced or eliminated without creating new problems (Mangus 2009).  
 
Although there are negative consequences of winter feeding, it is also recognized that feeding 
may be necessary to sustain elk populations in emergency situations. It may also be necessary to 
temporarily feed elk to reduce depredation problems or to keep elk from impacting deer 
populations in extreme conditions. For instance, elk are fed at Hardware Ranch each winter to 
keep elk from moving on the urban interface. These elk are also physically examined, disease 
tested, and an outreach opportunity for the public to view and enjoy elk.  Discussion of the future 
of the elk feeding program at Hardware Ranch continues as biologists weigh the benefits, costs 
and risks of the feeding operation and consider alternatives.  
 
In Utah, winter feeding of big game is currently guided by the winter feeding policy (UDWR 
2011). Under this policy, feeding is discouraged except under extreme circumstances. With the 
discovery of CWD in Utah, the feeding policy was updated to state that “the Division will not 
participate in any emergency big game feeding program that occurs within the known range or 
use area of any big game population where CWD, brucellosis or tuberculosis has been detected.”   
  
K. Competition  
 
Competition occurs when two species use the same limited resource, and one of the two suffers 
in some way because of that use (WAFWA 2003).  Competition can potentially take place 
===== PAGE 14 =====
13 
 
between elk and other ungulates such as horses, livestock, or deer.  Competition most often 
occurs where habitat is limited such as on crucial winter ranges or on the summer ranges of some 
drier units.  
 
Concern has been expressed by some that elk populations are responsible for declines in deer 
herds over the past few decades. Direct competition is possible during a hard winter when 
forage is limited because elk can successfully shift to a diet largely comprised of browse, 
causing a high degree of diet overlap with mule deer (Frisina et al. 2008).  Additionally indirect 
competition, such as spatial and behavioral differences between elk and deer, may occur for 
fawning/calving habitats (Stewart et al. 2002, Sallee, et al. 2022). The extent of competition 
between elk and deer in Utah is not fully understood and that information is difficult to collect 
and quantify, but recent research on the Book Cliffs suggests interference competition between 
both species in birthing and rearing habitat does not occur (Sallee et al. 2022).  Additionally, 
the presence of elk in mule deer rearing grounds had no effect on the growth of fawns from 
birth to six months of age, suggesting exploitative competition does not occur (Sallee et al. 
2022).  Deer herd declines have occurred in areas with few or no elk, and deer herd increases 
have occurred in areas with large elk populations.  More study is needed to fully understand 
when, where, and under what conditions elk completion may impact mule deer.   
   
There is also concern that elk and livestock compete for the same forage on shared ranges. 
Ranges where elk coexist with mule deer and livestock should be closely monitored to prevent 
over use and competition. Additionally, habitat improvement projects should be focused in 
those areas to reduce competition and improve range conditions for all species.  
 
L. Research and Elk Movements 
 
Understanding the movements of elk, factors that influence movements of elk, and potential 
barriers are needed to properly align management unit boundaries with biological groups of elk 
(Petersburg et al. 2000). Elk frequently move away from hunting pressure, which can make 
managing to a consistent population objective difficult in units with high amounts of migration. 
In southern Utah, individual elk that were radio-collared on the Mt Dutton unit have been 
observed on four neighboring units (DWR unpublished data). This can cause concern for both 
biologists and hunters because elk on a given winter range may have been on a neighboring unit 
during the fall hunting seasons. As a result, DWR, BYU, and many conservation groups have 
conducted research on elk movements on many units in the state. The results show that elk use 
the landscape at a much larger scale than was previously thought. Many management units do 
not fully encompass both winter and summer ranges for individual populations, and some units 
have elk from multiple units on winter or summer ranges. This creates a challenge to manage 
units to population and age objectives. In addition to movement data, information on body 
condition and survival estimates of elk are being collected, which aid in population modeling 
efforts and provide an understanding of overall herd health.  
 
Increased knowledge of elk movements can also aid in reducing elk-vehicle collisions. DWR and 
our partners have worked to identify migration routes and locations where elk are commonly hit 
on roadways. This information has allowed us to know where to place underpasses and fences to 
increase elk survival. These studies have also provided data on the types of underpass structures 
===== PAGE 15 =====
14 
 
these animals will use (Cramer 2014). Although costly, these efforts are helping to prevent future 
collisions, increase public safety, and minimize elk mortalities. 
 
IV. USE AND DEMAND  
 
Elk have become one of the most sought after big game animals in Utah. Geist (1998) in Deer 
of the World says the following of red deer, the elk of the old world:  
 
“It adorns coats of arms, crests and monuments and is the deer of legends, poetry, and songs. 
Castles were built in its honor and to display its antlers, and throughout history its hunting and 
management generated passions that transcended life, death, and reason…” 
 
Sportsmen are no less passionate about elk and elk hunting in Utah today. Hunter demand and 
interest for limited entry permits has always been high and continues to increase. In 2022, 
75,925 hunters applied for 3,117 limited entry permits, resulting in 1:19.8 draw odds for 
residents and 1:70.5 for nonresidents. Demand and applications have increased 
disproportionately to increases in limited entry permits, and as such, draw odds have become 
increasingly tough. Units managed for older age class bulls and early any legal weapon hunts 
are the most difficult to draw compared to lower age class units and hunts with primitive 
weapons or rifle hunts outside of the rut.   
 
In addition to limited entry permits, Utah sold over 47,000 general season elk permits for 
spike and any bull hunts in 2022. Demand for general season elk permits has increased 
dramatically in the last 5 years. In 2018 general season any bull permits sold out 34 days after 
they went on sale over the counter. In 2020 they sold out in less than eight hours and in less 
than six hours in 2022 after upgrades to the server capacity to facilitate faster online permit 
sales. General season spike bull tags sold out in just nine hours in 2022. This unprecedented 
demand for general season elk hunting opportunity was an important factor taken into 
consideration in writing this plan. Finding ways to provide sustainable general season elk 
hunting opportunities was a top priority.  
 
Elk are also a high interest watchable wildlife species. Nearly everyone enjoys seeing and 
hearing elk in the wild. Units which produce large bulls are especially attractive not only to 
hunters but to wildlife watchers as well. Many thousands of hours and considerable money is 
expended each year in elk watching activities. For instance, 15,000 – 20,000 people attend 
Hardware Ranch annually to view elk. As elk populations and habitats are properly managed, elk 
viewing and recreating activities will be enhanced for years to come. 
 
===== PAGE 16 =====
15 
 
VI. STATEWIDE MANAGEMENT GOALS AND OBJECTIVES  
 
A. Population Management Goal: Improve management of Utah’s elk populations.  
 
Population Objective 1: Maintain healthy elk populations at biologically and socially 
sustainable levels. 
 
Note: The statewide population objective is the sum of objectives contained in unit plans. 
 
Strategies:  
A. Elk Population Objectives 
a. Set population objectives and manage elk populations at appropriate spatial scales 
that account for migration patterns. 
i. Unit plans and population objectives may take into consideration refugia-
centric elk that are largely unavailable to public hunters or that live across 
multiple jurisdictions (tribal lands, national parks/monuments, neighboring 
states, etc,) where the DWR does not have management authority. These 
situations would justify aggressive tools to manage conflicts on private lands 
and increased flexibility for the DWR in developing and managing towards 
target population objectives, including objectives that take into consideration 
elk that spend substantial time outside the jurisdiction of the DWR. 
ii. Committees may consider and make adjustments to target population 
objectives on units with willing landowners/stakeholders when there are large 
blocks of private ground that are intentionally managed to hold large numbers 
of elk on those lands. As landowner tolerance increases this should be taken 
into account when formulating population objectives. 
iii. To address resident elk or elk that are largely unavailable to public hunters in 
areas with high conflict that are dominated by private, agricultural lands 
biologists may: 
(a) Recommend private lands only general season any bull tags for a unit, or 
specific area within a unit, to have longer seasons or increased quotas in 
general season any bull units. 
(b) Recommend limited entry bull hunts for specific units/areas. These LE 
hunts could be recommended in addition to the current LE season 
structure and wouldn’t be subject to LE bull age objectives, season 
structure or weapon splits.  
b. Establish local advisory committees to review individual herd unit management plans 
when considering a change (increase or decrease) in the population objective or unit 
boundary. Other unit plan updates and changes may be approved by the Division 
Director. 
i. Committees will be established following approval of the statewide elk plan 
where needed. 
ii. Committees will consist of the DWR unit biologist and regional wildlife 
manager or Supervisory Biologist as facilitators, two local sportsman’s 
representatives, and one representative from each of the following (if 
applicable): Farm Bureau, Cattlemen’s Association, Wool Growers 
===== PAGE 17 =====
16 
 
Association, Bureau of Land Management, USDA Forest Service, local 
elected official, RAC member, CWMU Association, Sportsmen for Fish and 
Wildlife, Mule Deer Foundation, Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, tribal 
representative, local landowner or landowner association representative and 
other affected stakeholders.  
iii. Recommendations from these committees will be reviewed by DWR and 
presented to the Regional Advisory Councils and Wildlife Board for public 
input and approval. 
iv. Committees shall be provided with the results of recent habitat projects 
completed and planned projects, DWR range trend data, research findings, 
migration information and any other applicable data. 
c. On units where population decreases are necessary, DWR will recommend short-term 
population objectives in unit management plans or increases in antlerless elk permits. 
 
B. Population Management 
a. Utilize antlerless harvest as the primary tool to manage elk populations within herd 
size objectives and target specific areas where range concerns or depredation 
problems exist.  
b. Properly manage elk populations to minimize competition with mule deer on crucial 
mule deer ranges.  
c. If drought related conditions and high elk densities are negatively impacting elk 
habitat or private landowners, recommend additional antlerless and/or bull elk 
permits for affected areas at the August Wildlife Board meeting. 
d. During severe winters, aggressively use antlerless elk harvest (public hunters and 
DWR removal) to minimize conflicts. 
e. Consider using over-the-counter cow elk permits to provide additional harvest and 
hunting pressure in areas of conflict.  
f. Use hunting pressure strategically to redistribute elk away from high conflict areas 
and encourage elk availability on accessible public lands. 
g. Encourage innovative ideas from regional biologists to manage towards population 
objectives.  
 
C. Monitoring Elk Populations and Elk Habitat  
a. Monitor all elk populations by helicopter survey on a three-year rotational basis to 
evaluate herd size, calf production, herd composition, and habitat use, as conditions 
and budgets allow. 
b. Evaluate herd size and population trends on an annual basis.  
c. Implement research studies where needed to close information and data gaps. 
d. Continue to support the interagency big game range trend study of crucial ranges 
throughout the state. 
e. Monitor range condition, utilization, and trends annually as manpower and budget 
allow.  
f. Once during the duration of this plan, GIS mapped elk habitat should be reviewed for 
geographical and habitat classification accuracy.   
 
 
===== PAGE 18 =====
17 
 
D. Predator Control 
a. Utilize the Predator Management Policy where needed to help achieve objectives for 
elk populations, including the management of wolves, if necessary. 
 
E. Disease Control   
a. Investigate and manage disease outbreaks that threaten elk populations including 
CWD and brucellosis. 
b. Promote management practices that minimize disease risks such as discouraging 
baiting/feeding, conducting CWD surveillance, and assisting Utah Department of 
Agriculture and Food in monitoring elk farms/ranches for compliance. 
c. Follow the emergency big game winter feeding policy, and avoid unnecessary 
feeding of elk.  
 
Population Objective 2: Foster support among stakeholders for Utah’s elk management 
program. 
 
Strategies:  
A. Landowner Incentives 
a. Continue to provide incentive programs for landowners that will encourage elk 
populations on private land such as the CWMU, Landowner Association, and Walk-
In Access programs.  
b. Address all depredation problems in a timely and efficient manner to increase 
landowner tolerance of elk populations in accordance with current laws, rules, and 
policies.  
c. Seek to remove barriers or disincentives for landowners to use hunters to help 
manage elk on private lands using mitigation permits, vouchers, or private lands only 
antlerless elk permits. 
d. Have DWR staff work with landowners to facilitate effective communication between 
landowners and hunters when using depredation hunter pool or alternate list hunters 
to alleviate conflicts on private lands. 
 
B. Habitat Acquisition and Restoration 
a. Identify and support the acquisition of property (fee title or conservation easements) 
from willing sellers that would better accommodate current population numbers or 
allow for increased elk populations. 
b. Identify future habitat restoration projects with stakeholders. 
c. Increase tolerance of public land grazers not enrolled in a CWMU or LOA by 
conducting habitat projects that will benefit livestock and wildlife.  
 
C. Public Outreach and Enforcement 
a. Educate the public on the use and validity of population modeling in wildlife 
management.  
b. Increase communication and understanding between DWR and stakeholders 
regarding elk distributions, population estimates, hunt recommendations, and 
management decisions. 
===== PAGE 19 =====
18 
 
c. On units with high amounts of social conflict, create elk committees during unit plan 
revisions and/or hold open houses to obtain public input. 
d. Enforce existing laws that protect resources on public and private lands. 
 
Population Objective 3: Achieve a proper distribution of elk on private and public lands. 
 
Strategies: 
A. Antlerless Permits 
a. Maintain private-lands-only anterless elk permits to encourage and target cow elk 
harvest on private lands. 
b. Continue to allow hunters to possess multiple anterless elk permits, but only allow for 
1 cow elk permit to be obtained through the public draw system. 
c. Use depredation permits and vouchers, public hunters, and/or DWR removal to 
harvest resident elk on agricultural lands or where elk are creating conflicts. 
d. Issue antlerless-elk-control permits on units with low or zero elk population 
objectives, units that are dominated by private lands or in other appropriate situations. 
Use caution with antlerless elk control permits as to not have a negative impact on elk 
distribution and consider private lands only antlerless elk permits as an alternative. 
e. Coordinate season dates and permit numbers to distribute elk appropriately within a 
hunt unit and to achieve adequate harvest in areas of concern. 
f. Limit flexibility on hunting seasons to the specified dates for antlerless elk hunts to 
make antlerless harvest and associated hunting pressure more surgical and precise to 
help achieve a desirable elk distribution on the landscape. 
g. Where appropriate, rotate and vary antlerless elk hunting season dates and hunt 
units/areas to avoid habitually pushing elk into refuge areas. 
B. Landowner Assistance Programs 
a. Create private-lands-only general season bull elk permits on any bull units to allow 
landowners and those landowners grant access to hunt bull elk on private lands. 
i. These private-lands-only general season bull elk permits may be issued at a 
regional, multi-unit, unit or sub-unit level with quotas and season dates to be 
determined based on need and circumstances. 
ii. If drought related conditions and high elk densities are negatively impacting 
private lands, recommend additional private-lands-only general bull elk 
permits and/or extended season dates at the August Wildlife Board meeting.  
b. Secure easements to increase hunter access to elk on public and private lands from 
willing participants. 
c. Work with law enforcement to protect elk and to reduce illegal activities with a 
special focus on trespassing, vandalism and theft. 
 
===== PAGE 20 =====
19 
 
B. Habitat Management Goal: Conserve and improve elk habitat throughout the state.  
 
Habitat Objective 1: Maintain sufficient habitat to support elk herds at population objectives 
and reduce competition for forage between elk and livestock. 
 
Strategies: 
A. Elk Habitat Classification and Assessment 
a. Identify and characterize elk habitat throughout the state. 
b. Provide information to educate counties, municipalities, and developers to promote 
zoning that recognizes elk habitats and movement corridors. 
 
B. Habitat Management  
a. Coordinate with land management agencies and private landowners to properly 
manage and improve elk habitat, especially calving and wintering areas. 
b. Work with state and federal land management agencies and private landowners to use 
livestock as a management tool to enhance crucial elk ranges. 
c. It is recommended that activities related to project disturbances occurring in crucial 
elk habitats should occur outside of Dec. 1 to April 15 for crucial winter ranges and 
May 15 to July 15 for parturition.  
d. Where crucial elk habitat will be lost, if avoidance is not practical, mitigation should 
be encouraged. A voluntary mitigation ratio of 4:1, improving or conserving 4 acres 
for every 1 acre disturbed is recommended.  
 
C. Habitat Improvement 
a. Utilize Habitat Council, Utah Watershed Restoration Initiative, Wildlife Conservation 
Permit funds, and other funding mechanisms to restore or improve crucial elk 
habitats.  
b. Increase forage production by annually treating a minimum of 40,000 acres of elk 
habitat. 
c. Coordinate with land management agencies, conservation organizations, private 
landowners, and local leaders through the regional Watershed Restoration Initiative 
working groups to identify and prioritize elk habitats that are in need of enhancement 
or restoration. 
i. Identify habitat projects on summer ranges (aspen communities) to improve 
calving habitat and summer forage.  
ii. Encourage land managers to manage portions of forests in early succession 
stages through the use of controlled burning, logging or other methods. 
Controlled burning in areas with invasive weed and/or safety concerns should 
be supported only when adequate planning and mitigation measures have been 
identified. 
iii. Promote Fire Use (let-burn) policies in appropriate areas that will benefit elk, 
and conduct reseeding efforts post wildlife. 
 
D. Habitat Acquisition 
a. Acquire important elk habitat from willing sellers to offset habitat loss that can be 
managed for elk and other wildlife.  
===== PAGE 21 =====
20 
 
b. Support programs such as conservation easements that provide incentives to private 
landowners to keep prime elk habitat managed as rangeland. 
 
E. Public Support 
a. Educate the public on the value of the general license, conservation, and expo permits 
for funding elk habitat improvement projects. 
b. Continue to support the conservation permit and habitat enhancement programs that 
provide crucial funding for habitat improvement efforts. 
 
Habitat Objective 2: Reduce adverse impacts on elk herds and elk habitat. 
 
Strategies:   
A. Travel Management. where allowed by land management authority 
a. Seek to maintain new permanent roadways within crucial elk habitats to 2 miles or 
less of roads per square mile.  
b. Work with project proponents and/or local governments to voluntarily mitigate 
impacts from new permanent roads in crucial elk habitats that would exceed 2 miles 
of roads per square mile. 
c. Consider use of seasonal closures as appropriate to mitigate impacts from new 
permanent roads in crucial elk habitats that would exceed 2 miles of roads per square 
mile. 
d. Support the construction of temporary and/or administrative roads for habitat 
improvement or land use management activities.  
e. Assist with road rehabilitation efforts for temporary roads constructed for habitat 
improvement or land use management activities. 
 
B. Energy Development 
a. Coordinate with land management agencies and energy development proponents to 
develop an effective mitigation approach for large-scale energy or other related land 
use activities or developments that have the potential to impact crucial elk habitat. 
b. Encourage energy development companies to avoid or minimize the impact of 
disturbance while using Best Management Practices to promote the conservation of 
wildlife resources. 
c. Promote movement corridors in areas of large-scale disturbance or areas that will be 
fenced. 
 
C. Migration Corridors 
a. Avoid, minimize or mitigate impacts from large-scale development that occur within 
migration corridors. Voluntary mitigation is recommended at a 4:1 ratio meaning 4 
acres of improved or conserved habitat for every 1 acre of disturbance.  
 
D. Noxious Weed Control 
a. Work with land management agencies, county weed boards, and cooperative weed 
management groups to control the spread of noxious and invasive weeds throughout 
the range of elk in Utah. 
 
===== PAGE 22 =====
21 
 
E. Wild and Feral Horse Management 
a. Work with federal land managers and local governments to support feral and wild 
horse and burro management through gathers and other efforts in elk habitat.  
 
F. Human Recreation 
a. Coordinate with land management agencies on recreational projects or plans to avoid, 
minimize or mitigate impacts in elk calving areas and critical winter ranges.  
 
G. Drought  
a. Following extended periods of extreme drought work with land management agencies 
and willing landowners to restore crucial habitats. 
b. Work to identify drought resilient seed mixes on ranges that are frequently affected 
by drought.  
 
H. Human Disturbance and Development 
a. Avoid, minimize or mitigate impacts from large-scale development that occur within 
crucial elk habitats. Voluntary mitigation is recommended at a 4:1 ratio meaning 4 
acres of improved or conserved habitat for every 1 acre of disturbance.  
 
 
===== PAGE 23 =====
22 
 
C. Recreation Management Goal: Enhance recreational opportunities for hunting and viewing 
elk throughout the state. 
 
Recreation Objective 1: Maintain a diversity of elk hunting opportunities. 
 
Strategies 
A. Opportunity Emphasis - General Season Units 
a. Provide the following statewide general season hunting opportunities: 
i. 15,000 spike bull permits with a sub-quota of up to 4,500 multi-season 
permits.  
ii. Split the current 13 day any legal weapon any bull hunt into two separate 7 
day hunts, an early and a late hunt occurring within roughly the same 
timeframe as the previous any bull season in October. 
(a) Issue up to 15,000 any bull permits for the early any legal weapon season 
or the muzzleloader season. 
(b) Unlimited any bull permits for the late any legal weapon season. 
i. Unlimited general season archery bull elk permits valid on both spike and 
any-bull units. 
b. Provide hunting opportunities that will encourage youth participation and maintain 
family hunting traditions:  
i. Unlimited general season youth bull elk permits valid on both spike only and 
any bull units during all respective general season dates using the specified 
weapon and following regulations specific to the units where they are hunting. 
ii. Draw only youth any bull (hunters choice) permits with a limited quota. This 
hunt typically occurs in September. 
 
B. Quality Emphasis – Traditional Limited Entry Hunts 
a. Provide varied levels of traditional limited entry elk hunting (Figure 3, Table 1). 
i. Maintain 3 categories of age class harvest objectives for traditional 
limited entry units including 6.5-7.0 years, 6.0-6.5 years and 5.5-6.0 
years.  
ii. Accurately monitor the age of harvested bull elk by collecting a 
statistically valid sample of teeth from all standard seasons on all limited 
entry units. Provide incentives to encourage hunters to submit teeth or 
implement mandatory tooth submission if necessary. 
iii. Recommend traditional limited entry bull permits on each unit based on 
the 3-year average and trend of age data. Permit recommendations should 
make progress towards the age objective. Biologists will supplement 
harvest age data by also taking into account high bull:cow ratios, high 
hunter success rates and hunts with difficult conditions that may reduce 
harvest age when recommending permit numbers.  
iv. Maintain quality, but seek additional opportunity by increasing permits 
when the 3-year average of the any legal weapon hunts harvest success 
rate exceeds 75%, and the unit is meeting or exceeding the age objective. 
===== PAGE 24 =====
23 
 
v. On traditional limited entry units recommend permits for the 3 weapon types 
based on the following percentages: 25% for archery, 15% for muzzleloader, 
and 60% for any legal weapon.   
(a) If a unit has all 3 any weapon season, permits should be recommended as 
10% for the early any weapon season, 30% for the mid any weapon 
season, 17% for the late any weapon season and 3% multi-season.  
(b) Adjustments may be made for units that cannot accommodate all 3 any 
weapon seasons.  For example on a unit without a late any weapon hunt, 
permits may be recommended as 20% early any weapon, 37% mid any 
weapon, and 3% multi-season.  
(c) If shifting allocation of permits to more challenging seasons reduces the 
unit average harvest age, biologists may adjust the average age to put 
more weight on seasons where harvest tends to be more selective and most 
likely to represent true availability of bulls. 
 
C. Restricted Weapons and HAMS hunts  
a. Provide additional limited entry opportunity by having some units or areas managed 
for restricted weapons including HAMS or restricted weapon seasons.  
b. Recommend limited entry bull permits on HAMS and restricted weapons units to 
increase opportunity while maintaining success rates in the range of traditional 
limited entry archery hunts 20%-40% or maintaining average age of harvested bull 
elk between 3.5-4.5. 
c. On primitive weapon limited entry units, allocate permits with 50% in the September 
archery hunt and 50% to a HAMS or restricted weapons hunt. 
 
D. Adaptive Opportunity Hunts  
a. These hunts are designed to be challenging to hunters, while providing more limited 
entry elk hunting opportunities and push perceived limits and boundaries.  
b. Results of these hunts and the status of the units where they occur will be carefully 
monitored and used to make adjustments, future decisions and recommendations.  
c. Ages from harvested elk on these hunts would not count towards the age objective. 
d. Recommend issuing a limited number of late season archery or restricted weapon 
hunts on all limited entry units where feasible and when the unit is meeting or 
exceeding the age objective.  
i. Permits should equal 1% of the combined limited entry permits on the unit or 
a minimum of 5 permits. Permit numbers may be increased if success rates 
stay low (<40%) and the hunt successfully provides additional opportunity.   
ii. Permits will be issued in addition to other limited entry elk permits on the 
unit. 
e. Recommend additional restricted weapons or HAMS hunts on limited entry units 
with high bull:cow ratios (> 40 bulls/100 cows) or as needed to manage sex 
ratios. 
f. Recommend limited entry bull elk hunts on general season elk units to provide 
unique opportunities to hunt elk where the quality of the hunt comes from a 
limited number of permits or unique season dates rather than from managing a 
unit or area for older age class bulls. These hunts wouldn’t be subject to age 
===== PAGE 25 =====
24 
 
objectives or the formation of limited entry landowner associations. Examples 
include a late season archery, HAMS or restricted weapon hunt on the East 
Canyon unit to allow opportunity at bulls that migrate in late in the year, or a 
limited entry muzzleloader bull hunt in the High Uintas wilderness overlapping 
the muzzleloader deer season.  
 
E. Hunting Access 
a. Continue to support programs that provide incentives for private landowners to 
manage for elk and elk habitat (e.g. CWMU, Landowner Association, and Walk-In 
Access programs). 
b. Identify and support the acquisition of leveraged pieces of property (such as 
Cinnamon Creek and the Book Cliffs Initiative) that control access to or management 
of larger tracts of public land for the purpose of increasing hunting and wildlife 
viewing opportunities.  
c. Support the responsible use of OHV’s in specified areas during hunting seasons. 
d. Assist state and federal agencies with the development of travel management plans.  
 
Recreation Objective 2: Increase opportunities for viewing elk while educating the public 
concerning the needs of elk management and the importance of habitat. 
 
A. Education 
a. Use social media and other media outlets to promote interest and emphasize the 
importance of elk habitat and population management.  
b. Promote public tours, elk viewing days, and spring range rides on crucial elk winter 
ranges to demonstrate the importance of elk habitat and population management.  
B. Partners 
a.   Work with partners (conservation organizations, state and federal agencies, etc.) to 
increase outreach efforts that promote elk conservation, habitat, and management.  
b.   Highlight the importance of the conservation permit program, expo permits, 
watershed restoration initiative, and license and permits sales for funding efforts to 
improve elk habitat. 
 
 
===== PAGE 26 =====
25 
 
Literature Cited 
 
Brodie, J., H. Johnson, M. Mitchell, P. Zager, K. Proffitt, M. Hebblewhite, M. Kauffman, B. 
Johnson, J. Bissonette, C. Bishop, J. Gude, J. Herbert, K. Hersey, M. Hurley, P M. Lukacs, S. 
McCorquodale, E. McIntire, J. Nowak, H. Sawyer, D. Smith, and P.J. White. 2013. Relative 
influence of human harvest, carnivores, and weather on adult female elk survival across western 
North America.  Journal of Applied Ecology 50:295–305.   
 
Clark, D. A., G. A. Davidson, B. K. Johnson, and R. G. Anthony. 2014. Cougar kill rates and  
 prey selection in a multiple-prey system in northeast Oregon. The Journal of Wildlife  
 Management 78:1161–1176. 
 
Crawford, R. P., J. D. Huber, and B. S. Adams. 1990. Epidemiology and surveillance. Pages 
131–151 in K. Nielsen and J. R. Duncan, editors. Animal Brucellosis. CRC Press, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
 
Etter, R. P., and M. L. Drew. 2006. Brucellosis in elk of Eastern Idaho. Journal of Wildlife  
Diseases  43:271–278. 
 
Follis, T. B. 1972. Reproduction and hematology of the Cache elk herd. Utah Division of 
Wildlife Resources. Publication Number 72-8, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. 
 
Freeman, E. D., R. T. Larsen, K. Clegg, and B. R. McMillan. 2013. Long-lasting effects of  
maternal condition in free-ranging cervids. PLOS ONE 8(3): e58373.   
  
Frisina, M. R., C. L. Wambolt, W. W. Fraas, and G. Guenther. 2008. Mule deer and elk winter  
diet as an indicator of habitat competition. USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P- 
52.  
 
Godfroid, J., H. C. Scholz, T. Barbier, C. Nicolas, P. Wattiau, D. Fretin, A. M. Whatmore, A.  
Cloeckaert, J.M. Blasco, I. Moriyon, C. Saegerman, J.B. Muma, S. Al Dahouk, H. Neubauer, and 
J.J. Letesson. 2011. Brucellosis at the animals/ecosystem/human interface at the beginning of the 
21st century. Preventive Veterinary Medicine 102:118–131. 
 
Geist V. G. 1998. Deer of the World. Stackpole Books, Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania, USA.  
 
Hamlin, K. L., and J. A. Cunningham. 2009. Monitoring and assessment of wolf-ungulate  
interactions and population trends within the Greater Yellowstone area, southwestern  
Montana, and Montana statewide. Final Report, Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Helena, 
Montana, USA.  
 
Jeffrey, D. E. 1963. Factors influencing elk and cattle distribution on the Willow Creek summer  
range, Utah. Thesis, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, USA.  
 
Mackie, R. J. 1970. Range ecology and relations of mule deer, elk, and cattle in the Missouri  
 Riverbreaks, Montana. Wildlife Monographs 20:1–79.  
===== PAGE 27 =====
26 
 
Mangus, D. 2009. Reducing reliance on supplemental winter feeding in elk: An applied  
management experiment at Deseret Land and Livestock Ranch. Thesis, Utah State  
University, Logan, Utah, USA. 
 
Miller, M. W., E. S. Williams, C. W. McCarty, T. R. Spraker, T. J. Kreeger, C. T. Larsen, and E.  
T. Thorne. 2000. Epizootology of chronic wasting disease in free-ranging cervids in  
Colorado and Wyoming. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 36:676–690. 
 
Miller, M. W., M. A. Wild, and E. S. Williams. 1998. Epidemiology of chronic wasting disease  
in captive Rocky Mountain elk. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 34:532–538. 
 
Nelson, J. R., and D. G. Burnell. 1975. Elk-cattle competition in central Washington.  
 Northwest Section of the Society of American Foresters, Spokane, Washington, USA.    
 
Petersburg, M. L., A. W. Alldredge, and W. J. de Vergie. 2000. Emigration and survival of 2-
year-old male elk in northwestern Colorado. Wildlife Society Bulletin 28:708-716. 
 
Phillips, G. and Alldredge, A. 2000. Reproductive success of elk following disturbance by  
humans during calving season. The Journal of Wildlife Management 64(2), 521-530. 
 
Sallee, D., B. McMillan, K. Hersey, S. Peterson, and R. Larsen. 2022. Influence of interspecific 
competition on mule deer birthing and rearing site selection. Journal of Wildlife Management 
DOI:10.1002/jwmg.22318. 
  
Sergeyev, M., B. R. McMillan, K. R. Hersey, R. T. Larsen. 2021. How size and condition  
influence survival and cause-specific mortality of female elk. The Journal of Wildlife  
Management. 85: 474-483.  
 
Sergeyev, M., B. R. McMillan, L. K. Hall, K. R. Hersey, C. D. Jones, and R. T. Larsen. 2022.   
Reducing the refuge effect: using private-land hunting to mitigate issues with hunter  
access. The Journal of Wildlife Management. 86.  
 
Smith, J. W. 2008. Utah off-highway vehicle owners’ specialization and its relationship to 
environmental attitudes and motivations. Thesis, Utah State University, Logan, Utah USA. 
 
Spraker, T. R., M. W. Miller, E. S. Williams, D. M. Getzy, W. J. Adrian, G. G. Schoonveld, R.  
 A. Spowart, K. I. O’Rourke, J. M. Miller, and P. A. Merz. 1997. Spongiform 
encephalopathy in free-ranging mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus 
virginianus), and Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus elaphus nelsoni) in North-central Colorado. 
Journal of Wildlife Diseases 33:1–6. 
 
Stewart, K. M., R. T. Bowyer, J. G. Kie, N. J. Cimon, and B. K. Johnson. 2002. Temporospatial  
distributions of elk, mule deer, and cattle: Resource partitioning and competition  
displacement. Journal of Mammalogy 83:229–244. 
 
 
===== PAGE 28 =====
27 
 
Thorne, E. T. 2001. Brucellosis. Pages 372–395 in E. S. Williams and I. K. Barker, editors.  
Infectious Diseases of Wild Mammals. Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa, USA.  
 
Tunnicliff, E. A., and H. Marsh. 1935. Bang’s disease in bison and elk in the Yellowstone 
National Park and on the National Bison Range. Journal of Veterinary Medical Association 
86:745–752. 
 
Turnley, M., D. Sallee, T. Hughes, R. Larsen, and B. McMillan.  2022.  Neonate deer and elk 
survival on the Book Cliffs management unit, Utah.  Utah Division of Wildlife Resources Final 
Report.   
 
Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2011. Emergency big game winter feeding policy  
 W5Wld-02. 
 
Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2020a. Predatory species policy 
W1AG-4. 
 
Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2020b. Utah Wolf Management Plan. Publication #  
05-17. 
 
WAFWA . 2003. Mule Deer: Changing landscapes, changing perspectives. Mule Deer 
Working Group, Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies. 
 
WAFWA. 2013. Understanding mule deer and winter feeding, fact sheet #2. Mule Deer 
Working Group, Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies. 
 
Williams, E. S., M. W. Miller, T. J. Kreeger, R. H. Kahn, and E. T. Thorne. 2002. Chronic 
wasting disease of deer and elk: A review with recommendations for management. Journal of 
Wildlife Management 66:551–563. 
 
Williams, E. S., and S. Young. 1982. Spongiform encephalopathy of Rocky Mountain elk.  
Journal of Wildlife Diseases 18:463–471. 
 
Williams, E. S., and S. Young. 1992. Spongiform encephalopathies in Cervidae. Scientific and 
Technical Review Office of International Epizootics 11:551–567. 
 
Wisdom, Michael & Preisler, Haiganoush & Naylor, Leslie & Anthony, Robert & Johnson,  
Bruce & Rowland, Mary. (2018). Elk responses to trail-based recreation on public forests. Forest 
Ecology and Management. 411. 223-233. 10.1016/j.foreco.2018.01.032. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== PAGE 29 =====
28 
 
Figure 1. Any Bull hunting units/areas, Utah 2023*. (*the West Desert, Deep Creek area will 
convert to Any Bull beginning in 2024, see Utah Hunt Planner for current status) 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 30 =====
29 
 
Figure 2. Spike only hunting units/areas, Utah 2023. 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 31 =====
30 
 
Figure 3. Age objective for limited entry elk units, Utah 2023*. (*the West Desert, Deep Creek 
area will remain a HAMS unit for the 2023 season and then convert to Any Bull for subsequent 
years, see Utah Hunt Planner for current status) 
 

===== PAGE 32 =====
31 
 
Figure 4. Elk age vs Boone and Crockett Score (Freeman et al. 2013).   
 
 
 
Figure 5. Average age of elk harvested in Utah in relation to length of main beam. 
 
  

===== PAGE 33 =====
32 
 
Figure 6. Elk habitat, Utah 2022.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 34 =====
33 
 
Figure 7. Statewide post-season elk population objective (dashed line, 78,990) and population estimates, Utah 2000–2021.  
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 35 =====
34 
 
Figure 8.  Annual survival of collared female elk in central Utah, USA, 2015–2017. The solid 
line (red) denotes survival with all mortalities included, the dashed line (blue) excludes hunter‐
related mortalities (Sergeyev et al. 2021).    
 
 
 

===== PAGE 36 =====
35 
 
Figure 9.  Annual survival of elk calves on the Book Cliffs management unit in eastern Utah.  
Survival rates are for the first year of life.   
 
 
 
Figure 10. Cause-specific mortality of neonate elk on the Book Cliffs unit in Northeastern Utah 
2019-2021. 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 37 =====
36 
 
Figure 11. Annual variation in pregnancy rates for elk in Utah, 2015-2022.. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Mean pregnancy rate of adult female elk by unit determined via transabdominal 
ultrasound, Utah.  Data have been combined across years.   
 
 
 

===== PAGE 38 =====
37 
 
Figure 13. Mean rump fat as measured via ultrasonography during winter captures for pregnant and non-
pregnant (open) elk in Utah. 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Pregnancy rates and age of elk in Utah. 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 39 =====
38 
 
Table 1. Limited Entry age objectives and average age of harvested bull elk by management unit, Utah 2015–2021.  
 
Unit 2023 Age 
Objective 
Year 3-year 
average 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 
Beaver, East 6.5-7.0 6.9 7.7 8.0 7.6 7.9 8.3 8.4 8.2 
Book Cliffs, Little Creek Roadless 6.5-7.0 7.5 7.3 7.1 7.0 7.0 7.0 8.3 7.4 
Fillmore, Pahvant 6.5-7.0 7.8 8.1 7.9 7.6 6.5 8.7 7.5 7.6 
Plateau, Boulder 6.5-7.0 7.3 8.2 7.3 8.2 7.5 7.2 7.8 7.5 
San Juan Bull Elk 6.5-7.0 8.1 8.2 7.4 8.3 7.6 7.8 7.7 7.7 
Book Cliffs, Bitter Creek/East 6.0-6.5 7.5 7.8 6.2 6.4 6.0 5.9 5.2 5.7 
Cache, Meadowville 6.0-6.5 4.8 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.5 5.3 7.0 5.9 
Cache, South 6.0-6.5 5.5 4.7 5.0 5.7 5.9 6.0 7.1 6.3 
Monroe 6.0-6.5 7.8 7.8 6.4 6.7 7.3 7.1 7.7 7.4 
Mt Dutton 6.0-6.5 5.9 6.0 6.1 6.9 5.8 6.8 7.5 6.7 
Panguitch Lake 6.0-6.5 5.4 5.9 5.1 6.1 6.7 5.7 6.7 6.4 
Southwest Desert, South 6.0-6.5 6.8 7.8 6.3 7.2 7.3 7.1 6.6 7.0 
Box Elder, Grouse Creek 5.5-6.0 5.5 5.7 5.2 6.0 5.5 5.3 6.4 5.7 
Box Elder, Pilot Mtn 5.5-6.0 6.5 6.1 6.7 5.3 7.7 7.2 5.7 6.9 
Central Mtns, Manti 5.5-6.0 5.9 6.3 6.0 6.4 6.3 6.8 6.5 6.5 
Central Mtns, Nebo/San Pitch Mtns 5.5-6.0 6.0 5.3 5.8 5.8 5.7 6.7 7.2 6.5 
La Sal, Dolores Triangle 5.5-6.0 - - - 5.0 4.0 - - 4.0 
La Sal, La Sal Mtns 5.5-6.0 6.6 6.3 5.7 5.9 5.7 6.2 6.2 6.0 
North Slope, Three Corners 5.5-6.0 5.7 5.4 5.0 4.7 6.0 4.8 5.5 5.4 
Plateau, Fishlake/Thousand Lakes 5.5-6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.9 6.0 7.2 6.9 6.7 
South Slope, Diamond Mtn 5.5-6.0 6.8 7.7 7 7.3 6.9 7.8 7.4 7.4 
Wasatch Mtns 5.5-6.0 6.6 6.7 6.4 6.3 6.2 6.3 5.9 6.1 
Statewide average  6.5 6.7 6.3 6.4 6.4 6.7 6.9 6.6 
 
 
===== PAGE 40 =====
39 
 
Table 2. Postseason (late fall) elk herd population estimates and objectives by unit, Utah 2017–
2021.  
 
Unit Population 
Objective 
Year 
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 
Beaver 1,050 1,500 1,400 1275 1200 850 
Book Cliffs 7,500 6,500 6,500 5500 5500 5,500 
Box Elder 675 700 650 700 700 700 
Cache 2,300 2,500 2,500 2700 3000 3,350 
Central Mtns, Manti 12,000 11,300 11,500 9300 9500 9,900 
Central Mtns, Nebo 1,450 1,300 1,400 1900 1850 1,700 
Chalk Creek 3,200 4,000 3,900 3600 3400 4,400 
East Canyon 1,800 2,400 2,300 2300 2800 3,000 
Fillmore 1,600 1,400 1,450 1350 1400 1,350 
Henry Mtns 0 30 30 30 25 25 
Kamas 850 600 600 700 725 1,050 
La Sal 2,500 2,900 2,700 2900 2700 2,100 
Monroe 1,400 1,000 1,050 1100 1150 1,100 
Morgan-South Rich 3,800 3,650 3,650 6500 6900 6,700 
Mt. Dutton 2,000 1,500 1,600 1050 1250 1,400 
Nine Mile, Anthro 700 1,200 1,100 1100 1100 1,100 
Nine Mile, Range Creek 1,800 1,350 1,450 1250 2100 2,100 
North Slope, Summit 300 275 275 300 300 750 
North Slope, Three Corners 700 430 480 490 550 600 
North Slope, West Daggett 1,300 700 750 650 620 1300 
Ogden 2,000 1,750 1,750 1600 1750 2,200 
Oquirrh-Stansbury 1,650 1,100 1,100 700 700 800 
Panguitch Lake 1,300 1,500 1,400 1400 1450 840 
Paunsaugunt 140 275 200 275 200 200 
Pine Valley 50 50 50 50 50 50 
Plateau, Boulder/Kaiparowits 1,700 1,200 1,300 1050 1150 1,200 
Plateau, Fishlake/1000 Lakes 5,900 4,900 5,200 4750 5100 5,450 
San Juan 1,300 1,300 1,300 1300 1450 1,400 
San Rafael 0 30 30 30 25 - 
South Slope, Diamond Mtn/Vernal 3,000 4,300 4,000 4200 4000 3,800 
South Slope, Yellowstone 5,000 7,500 7,500 7400 7400 7,400 
Southwest Desert 975 1,500 1,300 1075 975 975 
Wasatch Mtns, Avintaquin 1,800 2,000 1,900 1900 1900 2,600 
Wasatch Mtns, Currant Creek 3,200 2,200 2,600 1850 3000 4,000 
Wasatch Mtns, West 3,400 3,400 3,400 3400 3400 3,500 
West Desert, Deep Creek 350 350 300 400 200 200 
Zion 300 600 475 475 800 800 
Statewide Totals 78,990 79,190 79,090 76,550 80,320 84,390 
 
 