SOURCE: pipeline\RAW\hunt_unit_database\mule_deer_plan.pdf
PAGES: 67


===== PAGE 1 =====
UTAH MULE DEER 
STATEWIDE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
UTAH DIVISION OF WILDLIFE RESOURCES 
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
UTAH DIVISION OF WILDLIFE RESOURCES 
STATEWIDE MULE DEER MANAGEMENT PLAN 
I. PURPOSE OF THE PLAN 
A. General 
This document provides overall guidance and direction for managing Utah’s mule deer populations. This 
plan provides general information on natural history, management, population status, habitat, and issues 
of concern for mule deer in Utah. This plan also outlines the goals, objectives, and strategies for 
managing mule deer populations and their habitats. The plan will be used to help set priorities for 
statewide mule deer management programs and provide guidance for individual unit management 
plans. 
B. Dates Covered 
The mule deer management plan will be presented to the Utah Wildlife Board on December 12, 2024 
and, if approved, will be in effect for a period of 6 years (Dates covered: December 2024 – December 
2030). 
II. SPECIES ASSESSMENT 
A. Natural History 
Mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) are part of the deer or cervid family which includes moose (Alces 
alces), elk (Cervus canadensis), and caribou (Rangifer tarandus) among many other species. A unique 
feature of the cervid family is that males grow bony antlers that are shed each year. The name “mule 
deer” comes from their large ears, which resemble those of mules. The specific epithet hemionus means 
half mule. Mule deer occur throughout the western U.S. with as many as 11 subspecies described 
(deVos, 2003). 
Mule deer males, females, and young are known as bucks, does, and fawns, respectively. Fawns are born 
as singles or more commonly as twins after a gestation period of approximately 7 months. Fawns are 
normally born in June with the mean fawning date in Utah ranging from June 7–20 (Robinette et al. 
1977, Freeman et al. 2014, Hughes et al. 2024). Fawns born too early may have a higher likelihood of 
encountering late winter storms, which could decrease survival. Conversely, fawns born too late may not 
have time to grow large enough and build up sufficient fat reserves to withstand Utah’s winters. 
The antlers of bucks begin to grow as soon as the old antlers are shed in late winter. Bucks will generally 
live apart from does and fawns through the summer antler growing period (Geist 1998). The velvet, 
which covers and provides nourishment to the growing antlers, begins to shed in early September. In 
Utah, the rut or breeding period for mule deer peaks in mid-November. During the rut, bucks seek out 
and “tend” several does, waiting for them to come into estrus. Pregnancy rates in Utah are high 
averaging 85% for yearlings and 95% for adults >2 years old (Freeman et al. 2014, UDWR, unpublished 
data). 
After the rut, bucks become reclusive again until they shed their antlers in late winter and join herds of 
does and fawns, blending in with the rest of the antlerless population. In late spring, does seek solitude 
for fawning. At this time, yearlings from the previous year can be aggressively driven away by the does. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Once new fawns are several months old, adult females form family groups for the remainder of the 
summer that often include yearlings born the previous year. 
B. Management 
1. UDWR Regulatory Authority 
The Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (hereafter the Division) operates under the authority granted by 
the Utah Legislature in Title 23A of the Utah Code. The Division was created and established as the 
wildlife authority for the state under section 23A-2-201. This Code also vests the Division with necessary 
functions, powers, duties, rights, and responsibilities associated with wildlife management within the 
state. Division duties are to protect, propagate, manage, conserve, and distribute protected wildlife 
throughout the state. 
2. Past and Current Management 
History of Mule Deer Management 
Mule deer were common in Utah at the time of settlement, although not as abundant as today (Rawley 
1985). Mule deer harvest was unrestricted until after the turn of the twentieth century. In 1908 the 
hunting season on deer was closed to help protect Utah’s dwindling deer herd (Rawley 1980). In 1913 
deer hunting resumed when the legislature enacted a buck-only law. However, as the deer herd 
increased game managers realized the need for antlerless harvest in order to keep the deer herds in 
balance with their habitat. The first limited harvest of does began in 1934 on 4 separate herd units. 
Multiple permits, multiple seasons, and extra permits for antlerless deer were common in the 1950s and 
early 1960s. Total deer harvest (bucks and does) peaked in Utah in 1961 when over 132,000 deer were 
harvested (Figure 1). As the number of hunters and permits increased, deer populations were gradually 
reduced and brought more in balance with available forage and habitat. Extra permits and antlerless 
harvest were gradually reduced through the mid-1960s and early-1970s. 
By the mid 1970s it was apparent that deer populations were in decline. In 1975, Utah again adopted a 
statewide buck-only hunting strategy and a symposium was held in 1976 to discuss the decline of mule 
deer in the west (Workman and Low 1976). Under buck-only hunting deer populations went through a 
series of boom and bust cycles. The peak harvest of buck deer in the state occurred in 1983 when 82,552 
bucks were harvested during the general season hunts. Buck hunter numbers also peaked in 1983 with 
228,907 hunters participating in the general season deer hunt, whereas the total number of hunters 
peaked in 1988 with nearly 250,000 total hunters afield (Figure 1). 
Mule Deer Management Plans 
Management plans provide guidance and direction for deer populations in Utah. The statewide plan is 
developed jointly by the Division and a statewide plan advisory committee composed of representatives 
from different stakeholder groups including: hunters, agriculture, local government, conservation 
organizations, land management agencies, indigenous peoples, etc. The Division also convenes an 
external advisory committee when revising unit deer plans with major changes including any changes to 
unit boundaries or unit population objectives. These revised plans are taken through a public process to 
gather input from a wide body of interested constituents and finally presented to the Utah Wildlife 
Board for approval. The first statewide deer management plan was approved in 1995 and called for 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
managing public land general season units to a minimum regional average of 15 bucks per 100 does. 
Individual management plans were then developed for 53 deer management units and approved by the 
Wildlife Board in 1996. This plan remained in effect until 2003 when it was updated and approved by the 
Wildlife Board. Unit management plans were revised in 1998 following a reduction in the number of 
deer management units from 53 to 30, and revised again in 2001 to incorporate new population 
objectives and habitat information. In 2008, the statewide plan was again revised and approved by the 
Wildlife Board. In 2011, the statewide plan was amended with the general season buck-to-doe objectives 
being raised from 15–25 to 18–25 bucks per 100 does as an average in each of the 5 regions. 
Due to concerns over chronically low buck-to-doe ratios on specific management units within the 
regional hunt boundaries, the Wildlife Board amended the statewide plan again in 2012 and approved a 
general season unit-by-unit hunt structure. Under this management system, the state was divided into 
30 general-season hunting units with 14 units managed at 15–17 bucks per 100 does and 16 units 
managed for 18–20 bucks per 100 does. The lower buck-to-doe ratio objective was designed to provide 
for increased hunting opportunity whereas the higher objective was intended to provide opportunity for 
hunters to harvest older and larger bucks. The statewide management plan was revised again in 
December 2014 and in 2019. After the 2019 revision there was a change in unit plans that resulted in 31 
general-season hunting units. There were 10 general deer units managed at 15–17 bucks per 100 does 
and 21 of general season units managed at 18–20 bucks per 100 does during the 2019-2024 plan cycle. 
Unit plans are currently revised on a five-year rotation with each unit plan being revised the year 
following collection of range trend data (https://wildlife.utah.gov/range-trends.html). By doing so, the 
latest and most accurate habitat assessment can be incorporated into each unit plan. On some units, 
local working groups have been used to help with the development and implementation of unit plans. 
Those groups have been instrumental in garnering local support for mule deer management and 
providing local knowledge on factors limiting population growth and locations where habitat projects 
may be beneficial. Local working groups will continue to be used on an as-needed basis to assist in 
achieving the population and habitat management goals and objectives. 
Recent Mule Deer Harvest Management 
Following several years of drought and an unusually hard winter in 1992–1993, buck deer permits were 
capped for the first time in 1994. That year, 97,000 general-season buck permits were issued across 5 
hunting regions. The 97,000 permit cap remained in place through 2005, but due to difficulties in 
monitoring over-the-counter permit sales, buck hunter numbers exceeded 97,000 permits in some years. 
Permit sales were closer to the 97,000 cap after implementation of a drawing system in 2000. Because of 
severe drought during the early 2000s, the permit cap was temporarily reduced to 95,000 in 2005 with 
1,000 permits removed from both the Central and Northeastern regions. Due to continued drought 
concerns and, in some areas, severe winter weather, permits were held below the 97,000 cap through 
2012, at which time unit-by-unit hunting was implemented and the statewide permit cap was removed 
and permit numbers were set on a unit by unit basis based on buck-to-doe ratios on individual units. The 
total number of general-season deer permits available in 2024 was 71,525. 
Prior to 1994, data on buck-to-doe ratios were collected by wildlife biologists, but not used to determine 
permit numbers. The 1995 statewide mule deer management plan changed this management practice 
and set postseason buck-to-doe objectives for general season units at 15 bucks per 100 does for the 5 
regions. The regions, and later individual units, have been managed for a set range of bucks per 100 does 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
 
 
5 
since that time. In 2023, all general-season units either met or exceeded their buck-to-doe ratio 
objective (Table 1). 
Over the past 10 years, an average of 25,062 bucks has been harvested in Utah each year. The harvest 
level varies depending on population size and permit numbers with a low of 17,042 in 2023 and a high of 
31,987 in 2016. During the past 20 years, buck-to-doe ratios have shown an increasing trend in Utah with 
average ratios on public lands across the state rising from 13 bucks per 100 does in 1998 to 21 bucks per 
100 does in 2023 (Figure 2). With fewer hunters and higher buck-to-doe ratios, hunter success has 
increased on general-season units. Statewide average hunter success during the general-season any 
weapon hunt in 2023 was 35.0% compared to 31.1% during the 1998 any weapon hunt. 
In addition to general season hunting opportunities, Utah also manages for “premium limited-entry” and 
“limited-entry” buck deer hunts which provide a high quality hunting experience, high hunter success, 
and low numbers of permits. There are two premium limited-entry hunting units in Utah: the Henry 
Mountains and the Paunsaugunt. From 2019 to 2024, these units were managed for a 3-yr average of 
40–55 bucks per 100 does (Table 2 ) and >40% of the harvested bucks being 5 years of age or older. The 
Division, in cooperation with Utah State Parks, also offers one public-drawing premium limited entry 
deer permit available annually to hunt on Antelope Island State Park. The Division's premium limited 
entry buck deer management strategy was updated in 2015 and set the public draw permits at 49 for the 
Henry Mountains and 135 on the Paunsaugunt, as long as the 3-yr average of >40% of the bucks 
harvested were ≥5 years of age. In 2008, management buck hunts (3 points or less on 1 antler) were 
added to these units to help reduce their buck-to-doe ratios and provide additional hunting opportunity 
while not reducing the top-end quality. In 2018 cactus buck hunts were implemented on the 
Paunsaugunt unit to allow for some additional harvest of bucks with antler abnormalities resulting in 
50% or more of the antlers still covered in velvet in late October. These cactus bucks are present in 
higher concentrations on the Paunsaugunt unit, are often sterile and can provide a unique and additional 
opportunity for hunters. In 2024, 243 premium limited-entry permits were issued- 1 for Antelope Island, 
135 for the Paunsaugunt, 49 in the Henry Mtns. as well as 28 management buck permits and 30 cactus 
buck permits on the Paunsaugunt unit. 
There are 7 limited-entry units in the state that are managed for a postseason buck-to-doe ratio of 25–35 
bucks per 100 does. In 2023, all 7 units met or exceeded their management objectives (Table 3). In 
addition to managing limited-entry units based on buck-to-doe ratios, the Division also provides 
limited-entry hunts on general-season units based on the timing of the hunting season through 
muzzleloader hunts in early November. There are also three limited entry deer hunts that use shorter 
range weapons designated as HAMSS (handgun, archery, muzzleloader, shotgun, straight-walled rifle 
cartridge) hunts with season dates in November to coincide with rutting behavior. In 2023, the Division 
issued 1,299 limited-entry permits and 1,052 bucks were harvested. 
In addition to hunting bucks, doe hunting has been used to address habitat concerns on rangelands and 
alleviate depredation on private lands. In 1995, the Utah Legislature passed a law that required the 
establishment of population objectives on each mule deer unit. In some instances, doe hunts have been 
used to meet population objectives, although the current approach is to evaluate range trends, annual 
winter browse utilization, and deer densities to determine if population objectives need to be adjusted 
before recommending doe permits. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
6 
Changes to Buck-to-Doe Ratio Objectives in This Plan 
In the interest of long-term herd health, disease resilience and sustainability - this plan makes several 
changes to buck-to-doe ratio objectives. Recent data suggests that managing at higher buck-to-doe ratios 
may be detrimental to deer populations for several reasons. While some deer hunters prefer higher 
buck-to-doe ratios because they are typically associated with older/larger bucks, higher success rates 
and less hunter crowding, higher buck-to-doe ratios also limit hunter participation, increase the risk of 
increased CWD prevalence and spread of CWD (Jennelle et al. 2014, Potapov et al. 2016, Conner et al, 
2021). In addition, a recent observational analysis of robust, long term data sets in Utah which looked at 
a variety of factors influencing deer population size strongly suggests that managing herds for higher 
buck-to-doe ratios decreases herd productivity. It appears that deer populations managed in excess of 20 
bucks per 100 does only show positive growth during the optimal weather and precipitation patterns 
(Pal et al. 2024, in review). Conversely, herds with lower buck-to-doe ratios were more likely to 
experience population growth, even during less-than-ideal conditions making deer populations more 
resilient and adapted to hard winters, drought and other challenges regularly faced by deer populations 
in Utah. Managing to lower buck-to-doe ratios allows for increased herd productivity, reduction to 
disease risks as well as increased hunter participation and opportunity. 
In the interest of long term-herd health as well as optimizing hunter participation and engagement, this 
plan sets buck-to-doe ratio objectives for all units in the state and directs us to manage more general 
season deer units to a buck-to-doe ratio objective of 15-17 with fewer units managed at 18-20 (see Table 
1). In addition, this plan truncates the premium limited entry and limited entry unit buck-to-doe ratio 
objectives at 40-45 and 25-30 respectively (see Tables 2 and 3). 
C. Population Status 
The 2023 postseason population estimate for mule deer in Utah was approximately 279,000 deer; 69% 
of the long-term management objective of 404,900 deer. Since the large decline during winter 
1992–1993, the statewide deer population has shown periods of growth and decline (Figure 3). The 
population had good growth during the mid-late 1990s, but then declined during the severe drought 
years from 2000 to 2003 when fawn production decreased (Figure 4). The harsh winters in northern Utah 
in 2007–2008 and in southern Utah in 2009–2010 negatively impacted adult and fawn survival, resulting 
in population declines. Weather conditions from 2011–2015 were very favorable for mule deer resulting 
in an increase of nearly 100,000 deer. Impacts from a hard winter in Northern Utah in 2017 followed by 
several consecutive years of extreme drought led to a declining trend 2017-2021. Favorable winter and 
summer weather allowed for growth during 2022, but the record-setting severe winter conditions of 
2022-2023 led to another decline. 
D. Herd Monitoring 
Population sex and age composition for mule deer is determined through the use of postseason ground 
classification counts. On each unit, annual ground classification counts are conducted shortly after the 
general-season hunts (typically between November 15 and January 15) when mule deer are 
concentrated on winter range and bucks are in peak rut. Data are collected on representative areas 
throughout each unit, and biologists attempt to classify a minimum of 400 does on each unit. 
Classification data are used to determine annual production and survival of neonate fawns to 6-months 
old (fawn-to-doe ratios), to assess if herds are meeting their buck-to-doe objectives, and as input data 
for population models. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
 
 
 
7 
In addition to classification data, the Division also monitors survival and cause-specific mortality on 8 
representative units across the state. Adult female survival has been shown to have the most influence 
on population growth, whereas fawn survival, although less influential, shows considerable temporal 
variation (White and Bartmann 1998, Gaillard et al. 2000). Beginning in 2009, survival data were 
collected using VHF radio collars on a sample of adult does and female fawns. This provided good 
estimates of overwinter and annual survival, but little information on timing and cause of mortality. In 
2014, the Division switched from using VHF collars to satellite-GPS collars, which greatly improved the 
quantity and quality of data collected. The GPS collars send an email when they switch to mortality 
mode, enabling biologists to determine the timing and likely cause of mortality for each deer. Over the 
10-year survival monitoring period, statewide adult female survival has averaged 79.8% (range 72-87%), 
whereas fawn survival has averaged 52.1% (range 30-82%, Table 4). During the 10 years of monitoring 
cause-specific mortality, 46% died due to predation, 13% due to malnutrition, 7% from vehicle collisions, 
7% other causes, and 27% to unknown causes (Table 5). By understanding the extent and main sources 
of mortality, we are able to determine the likely limiting factors for each population and develop 
management actions to address those factors. 
In 2014 the Division also began monitoring nutritional condition of mule deer entering winter using a 
combination of ultrasonography and palpation (Cook et al. 2010, Table 6). Nutrition and the resultant 
nutritional condition can have substantial effects on virtually every aspect of physiology and productivity 
of animals (Cook 2002). Nutritional condition can affect survival including the types of mortality animals 
may be susceptible to, reproduction (including pregnancy, twinning rates, offspring weight, and 
birth-timing), as well as growth and development (Gaillard et al. 2000, Cook et al. 2004, Parker et al. 
2009, Lamb et al 2023, Hersey 2024). In addition to impacts on demography, deer in good body 
condition produce fawns that have the potential to grow larger antlers than females in poor body 
condition (Freeman et al. 2013). By knowing when and where nutrition is limiting mule deer populations, 
habitat treatment projects and other management actions can be implemented to improve population 
performance. 
E. Habitat 
Mule deer are adaptable to a wide variety of habitats throughout their range (Wallmo 1981). In North 
America, they live from the northern boreal forests to the hot deserts of the southwest and from the 
coastal rain forests to the Great Plains. In Utah, mule deer are found across the state, although they are 
less abundant in desert areas (Figure 5). 
Although mule deer occur in a wide variety of habitat types, there are many similarities in diet and 
habitat composition. Deer eat a wide variety of plants including browse, forbs and grasses. Deer are 
especially reliant on shrubs for forage during winter months. Similarly, fawn production is closely tied to 
the abundance of succulent, green forage during the spring and summer months. Even though 
vegetative communities vary throughout the range of mule deer, habitat is nearly always characterized 
by areas of thick brush or trees interspersed with small openings. The thick brush and trees are used for 
escape and thermal cover, whereas the small openings provide forage and feeding areas. 
Mule deer do best in habitats that are in the early stages of plant succession. This relationship is 
described in the Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (WAFWA) publication on mule deer, 
which states: “Mule deer thrive in early successional habitats, where forbs, grassy plants and shrubs 
dominate. These environments are not as stable as forest habitats, and they rely on fire or some other 

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
type of disturbance to return them to an early successional stage. If they are not disturbed, they become 
more stable plant communities dominated by large trees and large shrubs. Tree-dominated habitats offer 
mule deer a place to retreat from severe weather, but these areas offer little in the way of food. That is 
why it is important to provide a mosaic or pattern of habitats that can provide food, cover and water.” 
(WAFWA 2003) 
One of the major problems facing mule deer populations in Utah is many of the crucial deer ranges are 
in late successional plant community stages dominated by mature stands of pinyon-juniper or other 
conifer trees, and old even-aged stands of shrubs such as sagebrush. Many crucial deer winter ranges are 
covered with older shrubs with little or no recruitment of young plants, or are being replaced by annual 
grasses like cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum), which increase fire cycles. Additionally, many forest aspen 
habitats are being replaced by conifers that provide little forage for mule deer. In order for mule deer 
populations to thrive in Utah, it is essential that extensive habitat treatments be completed to revert 
sagebrush habitats back to young, vigorous, shrub-dominated communities, and restore aspen 
communities to early seral stages. Habitat treatments vary by site but generally include chaining, 
bullhog, and pinyon-juniper lop and scatter on winter range and prescribed fire and logging on summer 
range (Larsen et al. 2023). Figure 6 shows the habitat restoration priority areas for mule deer in Utah. 
III. ISSUES AND CONCERNS 
A. Habitat 
Deer habitats are classified into three main categories based on season of use: winter, summer and 
transitional. Deer use high quality forage during the spring and early summer to aid in fat and protein 
deposition (Cook et al. 2013). The higher the quality of spring and summer forage, the better the antler 
growth in bucks, the better does are prepared for lactation, and the more fat reserves deer can build up 
for use during winter (Tollefson et al. 2010, Monteith et al. 2013, Hersey 2024), and the amount of fat 
deer have entering into winter is an important predictor of over winter survival LaSharr et al. 2023, 
Hersey 2024). Additionally, high quality forage on winter range helps slow the rate of decline of 
accumulated fat reserves (Hersey 2024), helping deer survive. The size and condition of mule deer 
populations are primarily determined by the quantity and quality of these habitats as they provide the 
necessary nutrition to sustain deer throughout the year. Lack of quality habitat has been associated with 
decreased survival and recruitment of fawns, increased age at first reproduction, decreased reproductive 
output, and decreased survival by adults (Monteith et al. 2014, Lamb et al. 2023, Hersey 2024). 
Loss and degradation of habitat are thought to be the main reasons for mule deer population declines in 
western North America over the last few decades (Workman and Low 1976, WAFWA 2003). Crucial mule 
deer habitat has been and continues to be lost in many parts of Utah and severely fragmented in others 
due to human population expansion, development, and natural events. For purposes of this plan, crucial 
mule deer habitat is defined as habitat essential to the life history requirements of mule deer . Continued 
degradation and loss of crucial habitat will lead to significant declines in carrying capacity and/or 
numbers of mule deer . Urbanization, road construction, off-highway vehicle (OHV) use, energy 
development, drought, catastrophic wildfire, and expansion of invasive plant species have all resulted in 
loss or degradation of mule deer habitat. 
The quality and quantity of forage available on important mule deer ranges can be limited by a variety of 
factors. The encroachment of pinyon and juniper threatens to choke out understory forbs and shrubs 
and increase risk of catastrophic wildfire. Annual weeds such as cheatgrass alter natural fire cycles by 

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
 
 
 
 
9 
increasing fire frequencies, often resulting in shrublands being converted to less productive annual 
grasslands. Aspen habitat is declining in part due to conifer encroachment resulting from the 
suppression of naturally occurring fires. The seeding of aggressive introduced perennial grasses that 
outcompete native shrubs and forbs can reduce the ability of rangelands to meet the dietary 
requirements of mule deer. The DWR Range Trend Project (https://wildlife.utah.gov/range-trends.html) 
has documented many of these threats and how mule deer habitat in Utah has changed over the last 40 
years (UDWR 2018-2023). During the 1940s and 1950s, deer herds increased in response to abundant 
shrub growth on mule deer ranges throughout the state, as a result of heavy grazing on most rangelands 
(deVos et al. 2003). West-wide the entire sagebrush biome is imperiled. The loss and degradation of this 
ecosystem continues due to altered fire regimes, invasive plants, conifer expansion, overabundant 
free-roaming equids, and human land uses (Remington et al. 2020, Doherty et al. 2022). 
To address the decline in mule deer habitat throughout Utah, restoration projects are being 
implemented to target habitat improvement on crucial mule deer ranges that have shifted in dominance 
to less desirable types or have degraded and provide little productivity. In Utah, treatment projects on 
both summer and winter ranges have proven beneficial to mule deer. On winter ranges, mule deer 
selecting for treated areas had reduced rates of fat decline as compared to animals not using treatments 
(Hersey 2024). Similarly, mule deer showing greater use of treated areas on summer ranges had greater 
body fat in December compared to animals with less use (Hersey 2024). In Colorado, Bergman et al. 
(2014) found higher deer fawn survival in pinyon-juniper areas that had been treated as compared to 
those with no treatment. Habitat restoration projects are designed to move communities to earlier 
successional states, while restoring community functionality by providing a diversity of grasses, forbs, 
and shrubs that are available during critical seasons throughout the year. Ideally, restoration projects 
that benefit mule deer should be large in scale, include mosaic patterns to increase patchiness and edge 
effects, and be conducted in areas with high potential for success (Larsen et al. 2023). Although fire can 
be beneficial for mule deer habitat, particularly in high-elevation summer habitat, in some instances 
large wildfires can be extremely destructive by removing critical browse species that do not readily 
resprout (e.g., when on winter range). Projects in recently burned areas are designed to restore lost food 
and shelter and protect water and soil resources. Restoration of shrubs in these communities can be a 
slow process, but can improve mule deer habitat throughout Utah, which in turn, will provide the 
necessary habitat requirements to meet statewide and unit population objectives. 
B. Water Distribution 
Water is a fundamental need for mule deer (Larsen et al. 2023). When browse, forbs, and grasses 
consumed by mule deer have high water content, mule deer don’t need to drink as they can obtain 
adequate amounts of water from their food. However, when forage contains only limited amounts of 
water, access to drinking water becomes important. The spatial distribution of mule deer populations is 
often positively associated with the availability of water in arid regions of western North America 
(Hervert and Krausman 1986, Boroski and Mossman 1996). Consequently, recent work by state wildlife 
agencies depicts large expanses of the Intermountain West ecoregion as water-limiting to mule deer 
(Wasley et al. 2008). Wildlife water developments, or guzzlers, can help provide water to mule deer in 
arid areas, but need to be designed and placed in areas conducive to use by mule deer. To maximize 
benefits to mule deer, guzzlers should be built in areas used by females with young and spaced less than 
5 km from other water sources. Fencing should be of sufficient size to allow access (Krausman et al. 
2006, Larsen et al. 2011, Shields et al. 2012). 

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
C. Energy Development 
Energy is a $20.9 billion industry in Utah, generating $656 million in state and local revenues. Currently, 
Utah ranks 13th in natural gas production, 9th in crude oil production and #10 in solar generating 
capacity among US states (https://www.energy.utah.gov/plan/). Energy development can fragment crucial 
mule deer habitat and have direct and indirect loss of habitat (Northrup et al. 2015). All impacts of 
energy development on mule deer are not fully known but generally include added physiological stress, 
disturbance and displacement, habitat fragmentation and isolation, and other secondary effects (e.g. 
oil/chemical spills and contamination, increased noxious weeds, etc.; Sawyer et al. 2002, Lutz et. al. 
2011). Small, isolated disturbances within non-limiting habitats are of minor consequence within most 
ecosystems. However, larger-scale developments within limited habitat types are a major concern to 
managers because such impacts cannot be relieved or absorbed by surrounding, unaltered habitats 
(Watkins et al. 2007). For mule deer populations to thrive in areas of extensive energy development, it is 
essential to work closely with energy companies to minimize and mitigate for potential impacts. 
D. Population Objectives 
The current statewide population objective for mule deer in Utah is 404,900 and is based on the sum of 
the population objectives from individual unit plans. Deer unit plans are approved through a public 
process, and population objectives are set based on what the habitat can biologically support, while 
considering possible detrimental impacts to surrounding land uses. When deer unit plans are revised, it 
is essential that the best possible population and range data be used to assess the current unit 
conditions. In some instances, these data may indicate the population objective is too low and should be 
raised to allow for more deer. In other situations, the data may show that the objective is too high and 
cannot be attained under current habitat and climatic conditions. In these cases, population objectives 
should be lowered to reflect a realistic view of what can be obtained in the foreseeable future. 
Population objectives can be revisited as needed to address improving conditions for mule deer. 
E. Predator Management 
Predators are often identified as one of the main causes for mule deer herd declines in Utah. However, 
predator-prey relationships are complex and not always easily understood. There are often many factors 
which can negatively affect mule deer populations including predation. The complex relationship 
between predators and habitat is described by Geist (1999). “Inevitably predators are blamed for 
declining mule deer populations, in particular when the survival of fawns is low. There is no doubt that 
today’s predators are effective in killing deer. However, predation is not independent of poor habitat 
quality. Such translates itself less as a reduced birth rate, but as fawns born too small, too poorly 
developed and too weak to be viable. Here predators take fawns that have a low chance of survival 
anyway. Improved habitat quality, which leads to better growth and larger body size in deer, is also 
expected to lead to large, vigorous fawns that are more difficult for predators to catch.” 
Ballard et al. (2001) reviewed 40 published papers on the response of deer to predator control and found 
removing predators is most effective when 1) the deer population is below carrying capacity, 2) 
predation is identified as a limiting factor, 3) control efforts reduce predator populations enough to yield 
results, 4) removal of predators occurred just prior to the reproductive periods of predators or deer, and 
5) control efforts occurred at a focused scale. Mountain lions, coyotes, and in some areas black bears are 
the primary predators of mule deer in Utah (Smith 1983). On Monroe Mountain In southern Utah, the 
primary cause of death among fawn mule deer was predation by both coyotes and mountain lions (Hall 

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
 
 
 
 
11 
2018). In this study, predator control of coyotes had the potential to enhance fawn survival their first six 
months of life as long as the removal effort occurred over consecutive years, were spatially explicit 
targeting fawning habitat, and occurred when the likelihood of additive mortality was high and prey 
populations have the resources available to grow. (McMillan et al. 2023). 
Since 2014, UDWR and its partners have monitored the survival of more than 5500 individual mule deer 
using GPS collars. From these collared animals, the cause-specific mortality was assessed on nearly 1800 
adult and fawn mule deer (Table 5). By monitoring body condition, survival, and cause-specific mortality 
on many herds throughout the state, managers have the ability to identify populations that appear to be 
limited by predation (e.g. mountain lions are removing >7% of the adult population each year) and not 
habitat (i.e., animals are in relatively good body condition with significant fat stores). In these areas, it is 
likely for predation to be an additive source of mortality, and, as such, predator control is more likely to 
lead to an increase in the size of the mule deer population. In contrast, we can also identify populations 
that are in relatively poor body condition suggesting that habitat is limiting in quantity, quality, or both. 
Predator control in such areas would likely have little or no effect on the mule deer population as 
predation is likely a source of compensatory mortality; habitat improvement would be the only way to 
enhance populations in those areas. 
Predator management in Utah is guided by a predator management policy (UDWR 2024). This policy 
specifies that predator management can occur on units below population objectives providing a 
predator management plan is written and approved. The Utah Wildlife Board has set triggers to evaluate 
if a predator management plan should be written. Intensive predator management is costly, and 
therefore is probably not warranted on units that are near objective or where habitat is limiting 
population growth. Mountain lion populations should be managed at levels that allow mule deer 
population objectives to be met. On some units, this may require additional reduction of mountain lion 
populations which are negatively impacting mule deer populations. In regards to coyotes, the Utah 
Legislature passed the Mule Deer Protection Act in 2012 which allocates additional funds for coyote 
control efforts in Utah. These funds allow for a statewide bounty and targeted removal of coyotes by 
USDA Wildlife Services and private contractors. While not common, if black bear predation is identified 
to be a limiting factor to mule deer biologists should consider increasing bear harvest on those units 
through conversion to a more liberal harvest strategy. 
F. Disease 
Identifying, understanding, and monitoring disease is important for mule deer management. Chronic 
Wasting Disease (CWD) is a contagious, chronic, degenerative disease that affects members of the cervid 
family including mule deer, white-tailed deer, elk, and moose. CWD affects the central nervous system of 
an infected animal, which results in weight loss, progressive neurologic deterioration, and death. At 
present, there is no known vaccine, treatment, or way to eradicate the disease. CWD was first detected 
in Utah in 2002 and is currently the biggest disease concern for mule deer populations in the state. 
Appendix A contains the CWD plan, which provides more information on CWD and adaptive 
management actions aimed at preventing the spread of CWD within Utah. 
Epizootic Hemorrhagic Disease (EHD), and less commonly Bluetongue, are viral diseases that may affect 
mule deer in Utah. Outbreaks of EHD generally occur during late summer and early autumn where the 
insect vector Culicoides is most active. EHD outbreaks have been documented in several areas 
throughout Utah in recent years, and although losses to these diseases can be substantial within focal 
areas, they are isolated events and populations generally recover quickly. 

===== PAGE 12 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
Other diseases that occasionally have been diagnosed in mule deer across Utah have included 
pneumonia, diarrhea, neoplasms, brain abscesses, encephalitis, exotic lice (Bovicola tibialis) infestation, 
Elaeophora infection, malignant catarrhal fever, and mineral deficiencies. However, in most cases only 
single individuals have been affected. 
G. Access Management 
The use of Off-Highway Vehicles (OHVs) in Utah has dramatically increased in recent years. OHV 
registrations increased more than quadrupled from 1998 to 2022 (from approximately 52,000 to 
220,000). Uncontrolled use of motorized vehicles and OHVs can cause damage to mule deer habitat and 
disturbance to mule deer during critical phases of their life cycle. State and federal land management 
agencies are currently struggling with issues involving the use of OHVs on public land. Those agencies 
acknowledge OHVs as a legitimate use of public land, but also recognize the potential problems 
associated with uncontrolled activity. As such, these agencies have developed or are currently working 
on travel management plans on federal lands. 
Shed antler gathering and the associated human disturbance on crucial winter ranges, especially with 
the use of vehicles, can cause undue stress on mule deer during a time when they must conserve 
energy. The Utah Wildlife Board and UDWR in conjunction with an external committee formed in 2024 
continue to evaluate shed antler gathering activities and potential reform and regulation to minimize 
negative impacts to wildlife. 
There is also a demand for walk-in and horseback only access areas in Utah. Many hunters want the 
opportunity to hunt in a remote area that has lower hunter densities, where they don’t have to compete 
with vehicle traffic. Biologically, limiting areas to foot and horse travel can limit hunter pressure, reduce 
harvest, and increase buck to doe ratios. 
H. Depredation Issues 
Depredation of private croplands is an ongoing challenge and, in some areas, can be a significant 
problem for deer to reach their management objectives. The Division has committed substantial 
resources to address depredation concerns, and there are numerous programs designed to assist 
landowners with depredation situations. Depredation problems need to be addressed within the 
sideboards of state code, rule, and policy, and in a timely and efficient manner so that landowners will 
better tolerate migratory mule deer populations on their lands. 
I. Private Land / Cooperative Wildlife Management Unit Issues 
The value of private lands to the overall deer population in Utah is substantial. Many crucial mule deer 
habitats throughout the state are on privately owned lands. Unfortunately, some of those private 
rangelands have been converted from mule deer habitat to housing developments, recreational 
properties, or other uses. As such, programs that provide incentives to private landowners to manage 
their properties for mule deer and other wildlife are critical to the success of the state’s deer 
management program. Programs like cooperative wildlife management units (CWMUs), landowner 
associations (LOAs), general-season landowner permits, and walk-in access currently provide incentives 
for landowners to manage for healthy habitat and deer populations on their properties. Additionally, the 
Utah Watershed Restoration Initiative (WRI) has worked with numerous cooperating landowners to 

===== PAGE 13 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
provide funding and other resources to accomplish vegetation treatments on private and public lands to 
benefit mule deer and other wildlife, as well as livestock. 
J. Winter Feeding 
Supplemental feeding is often viewed by the public as a solution to a lack of forage on crucial deer 
winter ranges, especially during severe winters. Although feeding can benefit populations (Bishop et al. 
2009), there is evidence that the potential harm created by feeding mule deer may outweigh the 
benefits (WAFWA 2003). When conducted properly, feeding programs have been shown to reduce 
overwinter body fat declines and improve adult and fawn survival rates (UDWR, Rich County 2023, 
unpublished data). However, winter feeding programs are costly and require a tremendous amount of 
work and personnel to be successful. Additionally, supplemental feeding can potentially cause problems 
for mule deer including disruption of natural movement patterns, range/habitat destruction, and 
increased disease transmission. Additionally, feeding deer in winter may have limited value because of 
the complex and highly specialized digestive system of mule deer (WAFWA 2013). If deer do not adapt 
quickly enough to dietary changes, deer may die of starvation despite having a full stomach. 
In some extremely severe winters, it may be necessary to feed deer to sustain a base population 
(WAFWA 2003). If necessary, winter feeding of mule deer in Utah will be guided by the winter feeding 
policy (UDWR 2022). To be successful, feeding programs need to be initiated at the correct time, feed 
the correct feed and at the proper amounts, spread the feed out to reduce competition, and be done 
through partnerships to ensure there is enough help to be successful. The Division will not participate in 
any emergency big game feeding program that occurs within the known range or use area of any big 
game population where CWD, brucellosis, or tuberculosis has been detected as feeding concentrates 
animals and can increase disease transmission and prevalence. 
K. Competition 
Competition can occur in two ways: interspecific (between species) or intraspecific (between animals of 
the same species). Interspecific competition occurs when two species use the same limited resource, 
and both of the species suffers in some way because of that use (WAFWA 2003). When resources are 
limited, competition may potentially occur between deer and other ungulates such as horses, livestock 
or elk. This competition could be direct for specific resources such as food or water, or a more general 
displacement of a species from preferred habitats due to behavioral characteristics. 
From a direct resource competition standpoint, it is often assumed that deer and elk do not compete for 
forage since elk diets consist primarily of graminoids (grasses) and mule deer largely consume woody 
vegetation or browse. Although this may be true much of the year, there are circumstances when diet 
overlap can become a concern. For example, during a hard winter when forage is limited, elk can 
successfully shift to a diet largely comprised of browse causing a high degree of diet overlap with mule 
deer (Frisina et al. 2008). This overlap can create direct competition for forage between elk and mule 
deer when mule deer are most vulnerable. 
Mule deer can also experience behavioral and spatial competition with elk. Behavioral competition is 
most likely to occur on summer ranges during drought years or on generally arid units. The mere 
presence of elk may displace mule deer into lower quality habitats. GPS collar data from Oregon has 
shown that mule deer avoid elk when selecting habitat, but elk habitat selection is independent of mule 
deer distribution (Stewart et al. 2002). Interestingly, a recent study from the Book Cliffs found the 

===== PAGE 14 =====
 
 
 
 
14 
opposite result with elk presence having a positive effect on mule deer habitat selection (Sallee et al. 
2022). 
Feral horse populations in Utah continue to grow. Horses are less efficient at extracting nutrients from 
forage than ruminants like mule deer and elk. As such, horses must consume larger quantities of forage 
to survive. In arid environments, horses may also defend water sources from other species (Gooch et al. 
2017, Hall et al. 2016). More specifically, feral horses have a negative effect on water use by mule deer 
(Hall et al. 2018) suggesting that an increase in horse numbers will negatively affect populations of mule 
deer. It is crucial that the Division work closely with federal land management agencies to actively 
manage horses on federal lands to minimize negative impacts to wildlife habitat. 
In addition to interspecific competition, intraspecific competition can occur if individuals of the same 
species are competing with each other. For mule deer, since males and females have different niche 
requirements and are generally segregated in space outside the mating period, competition between 
sexes has typically been assumed to be minimal (Main and Coblentz 1996; Bleich et al. 1997; Kie and 
Bowyer 1999; Bowyer and Kie 2004). However, recent research from Utah suggests that increasing the 
proportion of males in a population negatively affects female body fat reserves entering winter, 
regardless of population density (Pal et al. 2024, in review). Previous research found an increase in the 
buck: doe ratio in the population coincided with a decline in fawn:doe ratio (Bishop et al. 2005; Bergman 
et al. 2011), but did not explore the underlying mechanism for it. Although the data indicate declining 
adult female fat reserves as buck:doe ratio increases, we do not yet know when the intrasexual 
competition is occurring. Hypotheses include habitat overlap during rutting activities which is also when 
does are trying to replenish depleted fat reserves, habitat overlap on winter ranges, and increased 
agonistic behavior during the breeding season as females attempt to displace unwanted males. 
Crucial ranges where elk, livestock, and/or horses coexist with mule deer should be closely monitored to 
prevent overuse and competition. Although competition may exist in some areas where resources are 
limited, the Division continues to work closely with our partners to restore and improve habitats to 
benefit both wildlife and livestock. 
L. Movements and Migration Corridors 
One of the primary ways that mule deer respond and adapt to changes in the environment is through 
movement. The ability to freely move allows deer to take advantage of seasonal resources, colonize new 
habitats and find mates. It also helps them avoid competitors, predators and parasites. 
Some of the longest movements that mule deer make are seasonal migrations between summer and 
winter ranges. Most mule deer in Utah are migratory, with some individuals moving up to 70 miles (van 
de Kerk et al 2021). In Wyoming, mule deer migrations up to 150 miles have been documented (Sawyer 
et al. 2016). Mule deer exhibit high fidelity to their seasonal ranges and often use the same migration 
corridors year after year to move between seasonal ranges (Brown 1992). Through extensive data 
collection, many mule deer migration corridors in Utah have been mapped and the information is used 
to make recommendations and management decisions. 
In 2017, the Division founded the Utah Wildlife Migration Initiative to document, preserve, and enhance 
wildlife movement throughout Utah. This initiative uses state-of-the-art GPS tracking technology to 
monitor the movements of species in near real-time. Information generated by tracking collars is used to 
define critical habitats for species, including migration corridors. Currently, the Migration Initiative is 

===== PAGE 15 =====
 
 
 
 
15 
putting a large focus on documenting mule deer movements. In the winter of 2023-2024, 929 mule deer 
were captured and fitted with GPS tracking collars in 19 wildlife management units throughout the state 
(Figure 7). 
GPS tracking information allows the Division to precisely define migration corridors for mule deer (Figure 
8). The Division uses the information in many ways to preserve wildlife movement. This includes 
collaborating with partners to provide safe wildlife passage across roads and mitigating deer-vehicle 
collisions. The data are used to engage with landowners and municipalities to preserve open space or 
promote sustainable land use practices. Also, information is used to target habitat treatment sites and 
evaluate treatment effectiveness. Furthermore, the data are used to balance infrastructure needs with 
wildlife conservation. 
N. Poaching 
While the effect of poaching on wildlife populations can be difficult to assess, the illegal take of wildlife is 
unacceptable. Law enforcement will continue to make mule deer protection a high priority by 
concentrating efforts on prioritized winter ranges. Success will only be achieved with vigilance and 
assistance from our conservation partners and the general public. 
O. Outdoor Recreation 
Utah is known for its diverse outdoor recreation opportunities like hiking, skiing, rock climbing, hunting, 
ATV users. Annually 2.5 million Utahns find themselves participating in some kind of outdoor recreation 
(https://recreation.utah.gov/utah-outdoor-recreation-strategic-plan/). Outdoor recreation has the 
potential to negatively affect wildlife populations (Czech et al. 2000). Conflicts can arise when outdoor 
recreation occurs in mule deer habitats during crucial timeframes, especially if habitat quality is limited 
or fragmented. While conflict can occur between outdoor recreation and wildlife if land managers 
consider those effects and mitigation strategies are used such as timing restrictions, recreation site 
placement along with other site specific measures effects can be greatly reduced or avoided. 
IV. USE AND DEMAND 
Mule deer are the most important game animal in Utah. Hunter demand and interest has always been 
high and the family tradition of mule deer hunting is strongly rooted in Utah. From 1960 to 1993, more 
than than 150,000 hunters participated in the annual mule deer hunt. Over 200,000 hunters participated 
in the deer hunt each year from 1977 to 1992, except in 1984. 
Although the number of general buck deer permits available has been slowly trending lower for over 2 
decades, the number of applicants for permits continues to increase annually resulting in increased 
demand for shrinking supply of both limited-entry and general-season permits (Table 7). In 2024, the 
resident odds of drawing a limited-entry buck permit were 1 in 25.4, compared to 1 in 7.5 in 1998. In 
2018 odds were as long as 1 in 28.7, but those odds have slightly improved in the last several years due 
to the increased limited entry permits originating from the limited late-season muzzleloader permits 
offered on general season units (in 2024 there were 356 limited entry late-season muzzleloader on 
general unit permits). The odds of drawing a general-season permit also increased from 1 in 1.1 in 2000 
to 1 in 2.3 in 2024. Although limited-entry permits are popular, many Utah hunters are also interested in 
being able to hunt every year. With fewer permits available, the number of deer hunters afield continues 
to decline. The North American model of wildlife management is based on the premise that hunters are 

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
 
 
 
16 
largely responsible for funding the management of game animals. If we continue to lose hunters and fail 
to recruit youth hunters, the current system under which we manage wildlife may be in jeopardy. In 
addition, for hunting to remain socially relevant and acceptable it is important that hunters are diverse in 
age and socio-econoic status across Utah. When the general population no longer knows a family 
member, friend or neighbor that hunts, hunting becomes more niche and less socially relevant and 
acceptable. It is critical to the future of hunting and wildlife management in Utah to provide large, 
diverse groups of people with the opportunity to hunt on a regular basis. 
Mule deer are also a high interest watchable wildlife species that hunters and non-hunters alike enjoy 
seeing deer in the wild. Many thousands of hours and considerable dollars are expended each year in 
deer watching activities. Units that produce large bucks are especially attractive not only to hunters but 
wildlife watchers and photographers as well. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Mule deer are the most abundant big game animal in Utah and are of high interest to hunters and 
nonconsumptive users. The mule deer population in Utah is lower than what it was in the 1960s and 
early 1980s, and we have seen encouraging periods of growth over the past 2 decades with overall 
numbers approaching what was present 40 years ago. Mule deer face a myriad of factors that can have a 
cumulative impact on their ability to flourish. Unfavorable weather conditions combined with the loss 
and degradation of habitat have likely had the most significant impact on mule deer numbers. Other 
factors such as predation and disease are also significant. If deer herds are to reach their population 
objectives in Utah, extensive habitat work will need to be done to rehabilitate crucial mule deer ranges 
and compensate for a climatic trend toward hotter and drier conditions. This habitat work must also be 
combined with predator management on units and in situations where data indicates top-down 
population limitations from predation. It is vital that the Division, state agencies, tribes, federal agencies, 
conservation organizations, private landowners, and others work together to protect and improve mule 
deer habitat if we hope to maintain and expand mule deer populations to meet management goals. 

===== PAGE 17 =====
17 
VI. STATEWIDE MANAGEMENT GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 
Population Management Goal: Expand and improve mule deer populations throughout the state within 
the carrying capacity of available habitats and in consideration of other land uses. This goal will be 
accomplished through habitat improvement, restoration, and protection in conjunction with private 
lands habitat incentives, disease management, directed predator management and strategic antlerless 
hunting when necessary. 
Direct Population Management Objective: By 2030, manage mule deer populations within the state as 
conditions allow and bring all populations to their unit objective (404,900 as of 2024) 
Implications: This objective can be accomplished if favorable environmental conditions exist and through 
the implementation of the strategies in this plan 
Strategies: 
A. Population Objectives 
a. Review individual unit management plans and revise where necessary to provide 
consistency with this plan. Unit plans will be revised and approved internally by the 
Division Director unless: 
i. New unit plan 
ii. Change in the population objective 
iii. Major boundary change. 
b. Use current research (body condition scores (BCS), survival rates, cause-specific 
mortality, range trend data, etc.), historic population estimates, and production data to 
set realistic and attainable population objectives 
c. Consider managing mule deer populations below biological carrying capacity to increase 
herd productivity 
d. Use the most reliable population models and data to evaluate herd size and population 
trends over time 
e. Continue to support law enforcement efforts to educate the public concerning poaching 
and reduce illegal take of deer 
f. Implement emergency feeding when needed in accordance with the DWR feeding policy 
and educate the public on the implications of winter deer feeding 
B. Direct Population Management 
a. Use current research including cause-specific mortality information and body condition 
data to identify limiting factors and make short and long term plans to address those 
limiting factors in deer unit plans and through predator management plans to manage 
for optimized, sustainable deer populations 
b. Manage to buck-to-doe ratios that optimize herd productivity and reduce disease risks, 
especially on general season units and CWD positive units 
c. Use antlerless harvest as the primary tool to directly manage deer populations 
d. Use antlerless harvest in combination with the Urban Deer Rule to reduce conflict and 
damage in urban areas 

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 
C. Population Monitoring and Research 
a. Continue to monitor all mule deer populations annually to evaluate fawn production and 
herd composition 
b. Continue to collect annual adult doe and fawn survival rates, body condition scores, and 
cause specific mortality to identify limiting factors on representative units distributed 
across the state 
c. Support the Utah Migration Initiative in identifying and protecting migratory corridors 
d. Evaluate the effectiveness of the crossing structures and other mitigation options over 
time and implement new technologies to minimize highway mortality 
e. Continue to implement research studies on specific herd units that are chronically below 
population objective to identify limiting factors, test management strategies and assess 
biological response as well as public reception and use research results to recommend 
solutions 
f. Increase monitoring and assessment of deer populations on units with active predator 
management plans 
D. Populations on Private Lands 
a. Support incentive programs for landowners that will increase tolerance and promote 
deer populations on private lands such as the CWMU, landowner permits, and Walk-In 
Access programs 
b. Address all depredation problems in a timely and efficient manner to increase 
landowner tolerance of mule deer 
c. Educate, advocate and work with municipalities/counties to enact sound management 
plans on zoning decisions in order to minimize and mitigate the loss of crucial mule deer 
habitat and to maintain the integrity of migration corridors 
d. Educate the public on the value of private landowner incentive programs 
E. Predator Management 
a. Actively manage predators according to the predator management policy, where habitat 
is not limiting and predators are demonstrated to have a negative impact on the 
population 
F. Disease Management 
a. Investigate and manage diseases that threaten mule deer populations 
b. Monitor and manage CWD in accordance with CWD plan (Appendix A) 
c. In areas with high prevalence of Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) offer additional deer 
hunting opportunities to reduce prevalence and spread of CWD through reduction of 
overall deer densities and especially the removal of older age class bucks, typically 
during late season buck hunts 
i. In public land dominated CWD concentration areas (boundary contains 
considerable public acreage holding deer and/or is 70%+ public lands), permit 
numbers and season dates will be presented to the Wildlife Board and permits 
will be allocated to public hunters through a permit drawing, an alternative list 
process or a hunter pool process 

===== PAGE 19 =====
19 
ii. In private lands dominated CWD concentration areas (boundary contains 70%+ 
private lands and/or has little publicly accessible acreage holding deer) DWR 
staff will present proposed permit numbers and season date windows to the 
Wildlife Board in the spring and, if approved, distribute buck and/or doe permit 
vouchers directly to cooperative/participating landowners 
iii. In areas with mixed land ownership and substantial deer distribution on both 
public and private lands, DWR will use a hybrid system with a proportional 
number of permits being proposed to the wildlife board and then offered to 
landowners and proportional number of permits allocated to public hunters 
through a permit drawing, an alternative list process or a hunter pool process 

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 
Habitat Objective 1: Maintain mule deer habitat throughout the state by protecting and enhancing 
existing crucial habitats and mitigating for losses due to natural and human impacts 
Implications: Loss of crucial mule deer habitat will need to be minimized to achieve population objectives. 
Mitigation is essential for loss or degradation of all crucial habitats due to natural and human impacts 
Strategies: 
A. Habitat Classification and Assessment 
a. Continue to identify, map, and characterize crucial1 mule deer habitats including 
migration routes throughout the state 
b. Identify and rank threats and limiting factors within each unit plan 
c. Continue to support the interagency Big Game Range Trend Studies crew in monitoring 
the long-term trends of crucial mule deer ranges throughout the state 
B. Habitat Management and Conservation 
a. Work with local, state and federal land management agencies via land management 
plans and with private landowners to identify and actively manage and protect crucial 
mule deer habitats including summer (especially fawning), winter, and migration areas 
as defined in Sawyer et al. 2009 
b. Avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts to crucial habitats due to human impacts (travel 
management, energy development, outdoor recreation, and human encroachment, 
disturbance and development) 
a. Where crucial mule habitat will be lost, if avoidance is not practical, mitigation 
should be encouraged. A voluntary mitigation ratio of 4:1, improving or 
conserving 4 acres for every 1 acre disturbed, is recommended. 
Minimize project-related activities and associated disturbances within crucial 
mule deer habitats occur outside of Dec. 1 to April 15 for crucial winter ranges 
and May 15 to July 15 for parturition. 
c. Acquire additional crucial mule deer habitats through fee title and conservation 
easements 
d. Educate, advocate and work with municipalities/counties to enact sound management 
plans on zoning decisions in order to avoid, minimize and mitigate the loss of crucial 
mule deer habitat and to maintain the integrity of migration corridors 
e. Conduct any mule deer feeding in accordance with Division policy to limit habitat 
damage. 
f. Manage elk populations to minimize competition with mule deer on crucial ranges 
g. Work with local, state and federal land management agencies and ranchers to properly 
manage livestock to enhance crucial mule deer ranges 
1 Crucial value - habitat on which the local population of a wildlife species depends for survival because there are 
no alternative ranges or habitats available. Crucial value habitat is essential to the life history requirements of a 
wildlife species. Degradation or unavailability of crucial habitat will lead to significant declines in carrying capacity 
and/or numbers of wildlife species in question. 

===== PAGE 21 =====
21 
h. Encourage and support federal land management agencies, state agencies, and tribal 
entities efforts to minimize competition with wildlife from horses and burros and to 
manage these animals at appropriate management levels (AML) 
C. Wildlife Management Areas (WMA) 
a. The Division manages many Wildlife Management Areas across the state for deer and 
other species to conserve critical wildlife habitats, to minimize and mitigate depredation 
on private property, and to provide hunting opportunities. 
i. Support WMA Habitat Management Plans 
ii. Provide seasonal closures to minimize impacts on deer during crucial seasons 
(closure dates will be specific to the WMA, seasonal issues and other factors) 
D. Travel Management 
a. Assist local, state and federal agencies with the development of travel management 
plans 
b. Support the responsible use of OHVs in specified areas during hunting seasons 
c. Consider the use of seasonal closures as appropriate to mitigate impacts from new 
permanent roads in crucial mule deer habitats and migration corridors 
d. Work with UDOT and other road departments to minimize and mitigate wildlife-vehicle 
collisions through right-of-way exclusionary fencing and wildlife crossings 
E. Land Management Plans 
a. Coordinate with local, state, and/or federal agencies on land management type plans 
such as Forest Plans, Resources Management Plans, County Resource Plans, etc. 
i. Reinforce state wildlife management mandate 
ii. Where appropriate, promote hunting, recreational shooting, habitat treatments 
and the collection of wildlife parts 
F. Energy Development 
a. Coordinate with local, state, and/or federal agencies and energy development 
proponents to develop an effective mitigation approach for large-scale energy or other 
related land use activities or developments that have the potential to impact migration 
routes and crucial mule deer habitat 
b. Encourage energy development companies to avoid or minimize the impact of 
disturbance while using Best Management Practices to promote the conservation of 
wildlife resources 
c. Promote movement corridors in areas of large-scale disturbance or areas that will be 
fenced 
G. Outdoor Recreation 
a. Coordinate with local, state, and federal agencies and other interested parties on 
recreational projects or plans to avoid, minimize or mitigate impacts in migration 
corridors and crucial mule deer habitats. 

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 
H. Human Encroachment, Disturbance and Development 
a. Approach local, state, and/or federal agencies and developers to consider effective 
mitigation approaches for new developments (residential, commercial, etc.) that have 
the potential to impact migration routes and crucial mule deer habitat. 
I. Wildlife-Friendly Fencing 
a. Consider installing or modifying wildlife-friendly fencing for effective and safe mule deer 
movements 
J. Drought 
a. Manage vegetation communities to be resistant 
b. Follow best management practices for guzzler maintenance 
K. Private Lands 
a. Support existing incentive programs for landowners that increase tolerance, enhance 
habitat and promote deer populations on private lands such as the CWMU program, 
landowner permit programs, Walk-In Access, depredation mitigation program, and NRCS 
Farm Bill programs for wildlife habitat, etc. 
Habitat Objective 2: Improve the quality and quantity of vegetation for mule deer on a minimum of 
600,000 acres of crucial range by 2030 
Implications: Habitat will need to be improved on at least 600,000 acres of crucial mule deer range to 
meet the population objectives in this plan. If habitat improvement projects cannot be completed 
because of inadequate funding, environmental restrictions, or unfavorable climatic conditions, 
population objectives may not be achieved. Additionally, because habitat treatments often require a 
number of years before they provide optimal benefits to mule deer, and if large catastrophic wildfires and 
energy developments continue to negatively impact crucial mule deer ranges, the population and habitat 
goals of this plan may not be achieved within the 6-year life of this plan 
Strategies: 
A. Utah’s Watershed Restoration Initiative (WRI) 
a. Utilize WRI as a tool to improve deer habitat with all partners across the state 
b. Continue to support and provide leadership for WRI, which emphasizes improving 
sagebrush-steppe, aspen, and riparian habitats throughout Utah 
c. Work with land management agencies, conservation organizations, private landowners, 
and local leaders through the regional WRI teams working groups to identify and 
prioritize mule deer habitats that are in need of enhancement or restoration (Figure 6). 
Emphasis should be placed on crucial habitats which include summer range habitats 
such as improving aspen, winter ranges sagebrush habitats, and improving riparian 
areas. 
d. Work with partners such as NRCS and university extension to increase landowner 
participation in the Watershed Restoration Initiative program 

===== PAGE 23 =====
23 
e. Initiate broad scale vegetative treatment projects to improve and restore mule deer 
habitat with emphasis on drought or fire damaged sagebrush winter ranges, ranges that 
have been taken over by invasive annual grass species, and ranges being diminished by 
encroachment of conifers into sagebrush or aspen habitats, ensuring that seed mixes 
contain sufficient forbs and browse species 
f. Encourage land managers to manage portions of pinyon-juniper woodlands and 
aspen-conifer forests in early successional stages using various methods including timber 
harvest and managed fire 
g. Support post-fire rehabilitation on crucial mid/low elevation deer ranges which are 
susceptible to weed invasion and loss of critical browse 
h. Continue to support conservation permit, wildlife habitat account, federal aid and other 
funding sources which provide critical funding for habitat improvement efforts 
i. Explore opportunities to engage with non-traditional users to fund habitat 
improvements 
j. Continue to seek new funding sources for habitat improvement projects 
k. Financially support early planning (NEPA) and/or clearances needed to implement 
habitat treatments 
B. Public Support 
a. Educate the public on the value of the general license, conservation, and convention 
permits for mule deer habitat improvement projects 
b. Promote and enhance programs that encourage volunteer participation in habitat 
restoration projects that benefit mule deer 
c. Educate the public on the primary purpose and value of Wildlife Management Areas for 
wildlife habitat and hunting opportunity 

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 
Sustainable Harvest Goal: Provide a diversity of mule deer hunting experiences and opportunities 
throughout the state 
Sustainable Harvest Objective 1: Provide sustainable mule deer hunting that encourages a variety of 
diverse hunting experiences and opportunities while maintaining population objectives 
Implications: Current hunting programs can be maintained if hunting implemented at appropriate levels 
identified in this management plan, allowing for sustainable harvest compatible with population goals 
Strategies: 
A. Hunting Strategies: Continue to provide three hunt unit categories (general season, limited entry 
and premium limited entry) in approximately the current distribution to provide a variety of 
hunting opportunities 
a. General Season 
i. Manage general-season units for a buck-to-doe ratio of 15–17 or 18–20 as 
specified in the statewide plan (see Table 1 for units and objectives) 
ii. Provide an “extended archery only” general season deer hunt opportunity that 
allows permit holders to hunt only the extended archery deer hunt areas/season 
dates 
iii. Division biologists will make proactive general season buck permit 
recommendations using a model taking into account: 
1. Current unit population estimate 
2. Observed buck-to-doe and fawn-to-doe ratios - including current data as 
well as recent years and trends 
3. Anticipated adult and fawn survival based on: 
a. GPS collar survival 
b. Observed body condition and body fat percentages 
c. Habitat conditions 
d. Weather including current conditions and extended forecast 
4. Unit hunter harvest success (historic and recent trends) 
iv. Annual permit adjustments to manage to the unit buck-to-doe ratio objective 
will be made automatically for all changes (increases or decreases) up to 20% 
from the previous year's permit number for any unit/hunt. Annual permit 
number changes exceeding a 20% change from the previous year will go through 
the public RAC and Wildlife Board process in the spring cycle and will be subject 
to Wildlife Board approval. 
v. Annual permit recommendations on public land units (>50% of deer habitat is 
on public land) should be made to make progress toward the buck:doe ratio 
objective for the unit. Units with large percentages of private lands or very low 
deer densities where classification data collection is difficult may take other 
factors such as crowding, hunter satisfaction, and harvest success rates into 
account to come to a reasonable permit recommendation acknowledging that 
buck-to-doe ratios may exceed the objective on some of these units. 

===== PAGE 25 =====
25 
b. Limited Entry 
i. Manage designated limited-entry units for 25–30 bucks per 100 does, see Table 
3 for units and objectives (some limited entry buck deer hunts not included in 
Table 3 are designed to assist with disease management and/or are limited entry 
primarily based on timing or limited permit numbers rather than a buck-to-doe 
ratio objective and this objective will not apply to those hunts) 
ii. When setting/recommending permit numbers biologists should take into 
account: 
1. Current unit population estimate 
2. Observed buck-to-doe and fawn-to-doe ratios - including current data as 
well as recent years and trends 
3. Unit hunter harvest success (both historic and recent trends) 
4. Anticipated adult and fawn survival based on: 
a. GPS collar survival 
b. Observed body condition and body fat percentages 
c. Habitat conditions 
d. Weather including current conditions and extended forecast 
iii. Annual permit adjustments to manage to the unit buck-to-doe ratio objective 
will be made automatically for all changes (increases or decreases) up to 20% 
from the previous year's permit number for any unit/hunt. Annual permit 
number changes exceeding a 20% change from the previous year will go through 
the public RAC and Wildlife Board process in the spring cycle and will be subject 
to Wildlife Board approval. 
c. Premium Limited Entry 
i. Manage premium limited-entry units for 40-45 bucks per 100 does (see Table 2 
for units and objectives) 
ii. When setting/recommending permit numbers biologists should take into 
account: 
1. Current unit population estimate 
2. Observed buck-to-doe and fawn-to-doe ratios - including current data as 
well as recent years and trends 
3. Unit hunter harvest success (both historic and recent trends) 
4. Anticipated adult and fawn survival based on: 
a. GPS collar survival 
b. Observed body condition and body fat percentages 
c. Habitat conditions 
d. Weather including current conditions and extended forecast 
iii. Annual permit adjustments to manage to the unit buck-to-doe ratio objective 
will be made automatically for all changes (increases or decreases) up to 20% 
from the previous year's permit number for any unit/hunt. Annual permit 
number changes exceeding a 20% change from the previous year will go through 
the public RAC and Wildlife Board process in the spring cycle and will be subject 
to Wildlife Board approval. 

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 
iv. Biologists will recommend that between 10-20% of the total permits for 
premium limited entry hunts be issued as “management buck permits” 
v. Biologists may recommend cactus buck permits as needed/available 
B. Hunt Types/Weapon Splits 
a. Recommend permits for the 3 weapon types based on the following percentages: 20% 
archery, 20% muzzleloader, and 60% any weapon. On some units, these percentages 
may be altered to help achieve buck-to-doe ratio objectives. When an early any legal 
weapon hunt is added to a unit, the allocation guidelines would be - 20% archery, 20% 
muzzleloader, 20% early any legal weapon and 40% late any legal weapon 
b. On units where crowding may be a concern or in the light of other complicating factors, 
additional hunts may be added or weapon type/season percentages may be altered 
from allocation guidelines to effectively manage to approved buck-to-doe ratios 
c. On limited-entry and premium limited-entry units with sufficient public draw permits, 
provide a multi-season hunting opportunity that will allow 3% of the hunters to hunt all 
seasons for an increased fee. The permits for this hunt will be removed from the 
any-weapon quota 
C. Hunting Seasons 
a. Establish season lengths that provide adequate hunting opportunity using the following 
season lengths as guidelines: 
i. 28-day archery season 
ii. 9-day muzzleloader season 
iii. 5-day early any weapon season (on select units to address hunter distribution) 
iv. 9-day any weapon season 
v. 9-day late limited entry muzzleloader season 
b. Limited-entry late muzzleloader hunts on all general-season units 
i. Permits will be recommended up to 0.5% of the general-season draw permit 
total with a minimum of 5 permits on each unit 
c. Season lengths for some hunts may be altered to accommodate: 
i. High-country buck hunts/overlapping deer and elk seasons 
ii. Deer migration 
iii. Extended archery areas 
iv. Management buck hunts 
v. Cactus buck hunts 
vi. Handgun, archery, muzzleloader, shotgun, straight-walled rifle (HAMSS) hunts 
vii. Multi state agreements 
viii. Other unique and compelling situations or circumstances 
D. Additional Hunt Strategies 
a. Continue to evaluate hunt boundaries to manage hunting pressure on a unit/subunit 
scale. Unit hunt boundaries should: 
i. Encompass the majority of the movements of specific deer herds 
ii. Maintain easily identifiable boundaries 

===== PAGE 27 =====
27 
iii. Consider private lands issues 
b. Continue to support incentives to landowners that provide crucial habitat for mule deer 
c. Evaluate units, subunits and targeted areas for unique, additional limited entry 
opportunities. Potential hunt areas will typically meet at least one of the following 
criteria: 
i. Low densities of deer 
ii. Underutilized by hunters 
iii. High potential for conflict with humans 
iv. Migratory deer populations (or segments of the population) that are not able to 
be hunted during standard seasons 
v. Disease management considerations 
d. Continue to evaluate areas for new extended archery hunt units 
e. Work with land managers to maintain access during hunting seasons where appropriate 
f. Consider cactus buck hunts on units with an appreciable number of cactus bucks 

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 
Outreach and Education Goal: Have broad-based public support and engagement for mule deer 
conservation and management 
Outreach and Education 1. Increase opportunities to educate the public about the needs of mule deer 
and the importance of habitat and other limiting factors 
Implications: In order to gain support for mule deer and mule deer management, it is crucial that the 
public understand factors that drive and limit mule deer populations. Efforts need to be made to educate 
the public about mule deer and promote everything that is being done to benefit mule deer and mule 
deer habitat in Utah 
Strategies: 
A. Education and Nonconsumptive Use 
a. Work with partners (conservation organizations, state and federal agencies, etc.) to 
increase outreach efforts to promote mule deer conservation 
b. Use electronic media, podcasts, and traditional media to educate the public about mule 
deer and mule deer management 
i. Youth hunting opportunities 
1. Highlight and explain existing youth programs and opportunities 
2. Give tips and potential draw strategies to assist parents/guardians in 
obtaining deer permits for youth hunters 
ii. Conservation 
1. Share information on where and how to view mule deer 
2. Emphasize the importance of proper population management 
3. Provide updates on current research and management actions 
iii. Habitat restoration 
1. Highlight the importance of the Watershed Restoration Initiative 
2. Share importance of identifying and protecting migration routes and 
corridors 
iv. Impacts of disturbance 
1. Impacts of highways and development and the importance of crossing 
structures that offer safe passage 
2. Potential positive and negative impacts of wildfire 
3. Human activities on winter range 
v. Factors that impact mule deer population growth 
1. Impacts of predators on mule deer populations 
2. Habitat carrying capacity and how it is dynamic 
3. Effects of severe weather 
4. Deer-vehicle collisions 
5. Disease 

===== PAGE 29 =====
 
 
 
29 
Literature Cited 
Ballard, W. B., D. Lutz, T. W. Keegan, L. H. Carpenter, J. C. deVos Jr. 2001. Deer-predator relationships: a 
review of recent North American studies with emphasis on mule and black-tailed deer. Wildlife 
Society Bulletin 29:99–115. 
Bergman, E. J., C. J. Bishop, D. J. Freddy. G. C. White, and P . F. Doherty. 2014. Habitat management 
influences overwinter survival of mule deer fawns in Colorado. Journal of Wildlife Management 
78:448–455. 
Bergman, E. J., B. E. Watkins, C. J. Bishop, P . M Lukacs, and M. Lloyd. 2011. Biological and 
socio-economic effects of statewide limitation of deer licenses in Colorado. Journal of Wildlife 
Management 75:1443–1452. https://doi.org/10.1002/jwmg.168 
Bishop, C. J.,G. C. White, D. J. Freddy, and B. E. Watkins. 2005. Effect of limited antlered harvest on mule 
deer sex and age ratios. Wildlife Society Bulletin 33:662–668. 
https://doi.org/10.2193/0091-7648(2005)33[662:EOLAHO]2.0.CO;2 
Bishop, C. J.,G. C. White, D. J. Freddy, B. E. Watkins, and T. R. Stephenson. 2009. Effect of enhanced 
nutrition on mule deer population rate of change. Wildlife Monographs 172:1-28. 
https://doi.org/10.2193/2008-107. 
Bleich, V. C., R. T. Bowyer, and J. D. Wehausen. 1997. Sexual segregation in mountain sheep: resources 
or predation? Wildlife Monographs 3-50. https://www.jstor.org/stable/3830743 
Boroski, B. B. and A. S. Mossman. 1996. Distribution of mule deer in relation to water sources in 
northern California. Journal of Wildlife Management 60:770–776. 
Bowyer, R. T. and J. G. Kie. 2004. Effects of foraging activity on sexual segregation in mule deer. Journal 
of Mammalogy 85:498–504. https://doi.org/10.1644/BOS-115. 
Brown, C. G. 1992. Movement and migration patterns of mule deer in southeastern Idaho. Journal of 
Wildlife Management 56:246–253. 
Conner MM, Wood ME, Hubbs A, Binfet J, Holland A, Meduna LR, Roug A, Runge JP , Nordeen TD, 
Pybus MJ, Miller MW. 2021. The relationship between harvest management and chronic wasting 
disease prevalence trends in western mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) herds. Journal of Wildlife 
Diseases 57(4): 831-843. 
Cook, J. C. 2002. Nutrition and food. Pages 259–349 in D. E. Toweill and J. W. Thomas, editors. North 
American Elk: Ecology and Management. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, USA. 
Cook, J. G., B. K. Johnson, R. C. Cook, R. A. Riggs, T. Delcurto, L. D. Bryant, and L. L. Irwin. 2004. Effects 
of summer–autumn nutrition and parturition date on reproduction and survival of elk. Wildlife 
Monographs 155:1–61. 

===== PAGE 30 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
Cook, R. C., J. G. Cook, T. R. Stephenson, W. L. Myers, S. M. McCorquodale, D. J. Vales, L. L. Irwin, P . B. 
Hall, R. D. Spencer, S. L. Murphie, K. A. Schoenecker, and P . J. Miller. 2010. Revisions of rump fat 
and body scoring indices for deer, elk, and moose. Journal of Wildlife Management 74:880–896. 
Cook, R. C., J. G. Cook, D. J. Vales, B. K. Johnson, S. M. McCorquodale, L. A. Shipley, R. A. Riggs, L. L. Irwin, 
S. L. Murphie, B. L. Murphie, K. A. Schoenecker, F. Geyer, P . B. Hall, R. D. Spencer, D. A. Immell, 
D. H. Jackson, B. L. Tiller, P . J. Miller, and L. Schmitz. 2013. Regional and seasonal patterns of 
nutritional condition and reproduction in elk. Wildlife Monographs 184:1–45. 
Czech, B., P . R. Krausman, and P . K. Devers. 2000. Economic associations among causes of species 
endangerment in the United States. BioScience 50:593–601. 
deVos, J. C., M. R. Conover, and N. E. Headrick. 2003. Mule deer conservation: Issues and management 
strategies. Jack H. Berryman Institute Press, Logan, Utah, USA. 
Doherty, K., Theobald, D.M., Bradford, J.B., Wiechman, L.A., Bedrosian, G., Boyd, C.S., Cahill, M., 
Coates, P .S., Creutzburg, M.K., Crist, M.R., Finn, S.P ., Kumar, A.V., Littlefield, C.E., Maestas, J.D., 
Prentice, K.L., Prochazka, B.G., Remington, T.E., Sparklin, W.D., Tull, J.C., Wurtzebach, Z., and 
Zeller, K.A., 2022, A sagebrush conservation design to proactively restore America’s sagebrush 
biome: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2022–1081, 38 p., 
https://doi.org/10.3133/ofr20221081. 
Eberhardt L. E. and H. C. Pickens. 1979. Homing in mule deer. Southwestern Naturalist 24:705–706. 
Freeman, E. D., R. T. Larsen, K. C. Klegg, and B. R. McMillan. 2013. Long-lasting effects of maternal 
condition in large ungulates. PLoS ONE 8(3):e58373. 
Freeman, E. D., R. T. Larsen, M. E. Peterson, C. R. Anderson, K. R. Hersey, and B. R. McMillan. 2014. 
Effect of male-biased harvest on mule deer: Implications for rates of pregnancy and 
synchrony/timing of parturition. Wildlife Society Bulletin 38(4):806–811. 
Frisina, M. R., C. L. Wambolt, W. W. Fraas, and G. Guenther. 2008. Mule deer and elk winter diet as an 
indicator of habitat competition. USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-52. 
Gaillard, J.-M., M. Festa-Bianchet, N. G. Yoccoz, A. Loison, and C. Toigo. 2000. Temporal variation in 
fitness components and population dynamics of large herbivores. Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics, 31:367–393. 
Geist, V. G. 1998. Deer of the world. Stackpole Books, Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania, USA. 
Geist, V. G. 1999. Mule deer country. Northword Press, Minnetonka, Minnesota, USA. 
Gooch, A. M. J., S. L. Petersen, G. H. Collins, T. S. Smith, B. R. McMillan, and D. L. Eggett. 2017. The 
impact of feral horses on pronghorn behavior at water sources. Journal of Arid Environments 
138:38. 
Hall, J.T. 2018. Survival of neonate mule deer fawns in southern Utah: Effects of coyote removal and 
synchrony of parturition. M.S. Thesis, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, USA. 

===== PAGE 31 =====
 
 
 
 
31 
Hall L. K., R. T. Larsen, M. D. Westover, C. C. Day, R. N. Knight, and B. R. McMillan. 2016. Influence of 
exotic horses on the use of water by communities of native wildlife in a semi-arid environment. 
Journal of Arid Environments 127:100–105. 
Hall, L. K., R. T. Larsen, R. N. Knight, and B. R. McMillan. 2018. Feral horses influence both spatial and 
temporal patterns of water use by native ungulates in a semi-arid environment. Ecosphere 
9:e02096. 
Hersey, K. R. 2024. Linking variation in mule deer nutritional condition and age to population 
performance in a temperate environment. Dissertation. Utah State University, Logan, Utah, 
USA. 
Hervert, J. and P . R. Krausman. 1986. Desert mule deer use of water developments in Arizona. Journal 
of Wildlife Management 50:670–676. 
Hughes, T. A., R. T. Larsen, K. R. Hersey, M. van de Kerk, and B. R. McMillan. 2024. Evaluating 
movement-based methods for estimating the frequency and timing of parturition in mule deer. 
Movement Ecology 12 https://doi.org/10.1186/s40462-024-00450-4 
Jennelle CS, Henaux V, Wasserberg G, Thiagarajan B, Rolley RE, Samuel MD. 2014. Transmission 
of chronic wasting disease in Wisconsin white-tailed deer: implications for disease spread and 
management. PLoS One 9: e91043. 
Kie, J. G. and R. T. Bowyer. 1999. Sexual segregation in white-tailed deer: Density-dependent changes in 
use of space, habitat selection, and dietary niche. Journal of Mammalogy 80:1004–1020. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/1383271 
Krausman, P . R., S. S. Rosenstock, and J. W. Cain III. 2006. Developed waters for wildlife: science, 
perception, values, and controversy. Wildlife Society Bulletin 34:563–569. 
Lamb, S., B. R. McMillan, M. van de Kerk, P . B. Frandsen, K. R. Hersey, and R. T. Larsen. 2023. From 
conception to recruitment: Nutritional condition of the dam dictates the likelihood of 
success in a temperate ungulate. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 11:1090116. 
doi: 10.3389/fevo.2023.1090116 
Larsen, R. T., J. A. Bissonette, A. C. Robinson, and J. T. Flinders. 2011. Does small-perimeter fencing 
inhibit mule deer or pronghorn use of water developments? Journal of Wildlife Management 
75:1417–1425. 
Larsen, R.T., Krausman P .R., Nielsen N., Randall J., Summers D.D., Jones, C.D. Habitat 
improvement and water supplementation. In Heffelfinger, JR, and PR Krausman, eds. Ecology and 
management of black-tailed and mule deer of North America. CRC Press, 2023. Pp. 363-381. 
LaSharr, T. N., S. P . H. Dwinnell, R. P . Jakopak, J. Randall, R. C. Kaiser, M. Thonhoff, B. Scurlock, T. 
Fieseler, N. Hymas, A. Hymas, N. Roberts, J. Hobbs, M. Zornes, D. G. Brimeyer, G. Fralick, and K. 
L. Monteith. 2023. Behavior, nutrition, and environment drive survival of a large herbivore in 
the face of extreme winter conditions. Ecosphere 14:e4601. 

===== PAGE 32 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
Lutz, D. W., J. R. Heffelfinger, S. A. Tessmann, R. S. Gamo, and S. Siegel. 2011. Energy Development 
Guidelines for Mule Deer. Mule Deer Working Group, Western Association of Fish and Wildlife 
Agencies, USA. 
Main, M. B. and B. E. Coblentz. 1996. Sexual segregation in rocky mountain mule deer. The Journal of 
Wildlife Management 60:497-507. https://doi.org/10.2307/3802067 
McMillan B. R., J. T. Hall, E. D. Freeman, K. R. Hersey, R. T. Larsen. 2023. Both temporal and spatial 
aspects of predator management influence survival of a temperate ungulate through early life. 
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 11:1087063. doi: 10.3389/fevo.2023.1087063. 
Monteith, K. L., V. C. Bleich, T. R. Stephenson, B. M. Pierce, M. M. Connor, J. G. Kie, and R. T. Bowyer. 
2014. Life-history characteristics of mule deer: Effects of nutrition in a variable 
environment. Wildlife Monographs 186:1–56. 
Monteith, K. L., T. R. Stephenson, V. C. Bleich, M. M. Conner, B. M. Pierce, and R. T. Bowyer. 2013. Risk-
sensitive allocation in seasonal dynamics of fat and protein reserves in a long-lived mammal. 
Journal of Animal Ecology 82:377–388. 
Northrup, J. M., Anderson, C. R., & Wittemyer, G. (2015). Quantifying spatial habitat loss from 
hydrocarbon development through assessing habitat selection patterns of Mule Deer. Global 
Change Biology, 21, 3961–3970. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.13037 
Pal, R., R. T. Larsen, K. R. Hersey, L. Corlatti, and B. R. McMillan. 2024. Dams in distress: impact of 
sex-ratio variation on females and population dynamics in mule deer. Journal of Applied Ecology. 
In review. 
Parker, K. L., P . S. Barboza, and M. P . Gillingham. 2009. Nutrition integrates environmental responses of 
ungulates. Functional Ecology 23:57–69. 
Potapov A, Merrill E, Pybus M, Lewis MA. 2016. Chronic wasting disease: transmission mechanisms and 
the possibility of harvest management. PLoS One 11: e0151039. 
Rawley, E. V. 1980. Species plan for Utah’s big game resources. Publication number 80-14. Division of 
Wildlife Resources, Department of Natural Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. 
Rawley, E. V. 1985. Early records of wildlife in Utah. Publication number 86-2. Division of Wildlife 
Resources, Department of Natural Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. 
Remington, T.E., Deibert, P .A., Hanser, S.E., Davis, D.M., Robb, L.A., and Welty, J.L., 2021, 
Sagebrush conservation strategy—Challenges to sagebrush conservation: U.S. Geological Survey 
Open-File Report 2020–1125, 327 p. 
Robinette, W. L., N. V. Hancock, and D. A. Jones. 1977. The Oak Creek mule deer herd in Utah. 
Publication number 77-2. Division of Wildlife Resources, Department of Natural Resources, Salt 
Lake City, Utah, USA. 

===== PAGE 33 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
Sallee, D. W, B. R. McMillan, K. R. Hersey, S. L. Petersen, and R. T. Larsen. 2022. Influence of interspecific 
competition on mule deer birthing and rearing site selection. Journal of Wildlife Management 
87: e22318. 
Sawyer, H., F. Lindzey, D. McWhirter, and K. Andrews. 2002. Potential effects of oil and gas 
development on mule deer and pronghorn populations in western Wyoming. Transactions of 
the 67th North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 67:350–365. 
Sawyer, H., M. J. Kauffman, R. M. Nielson, and J. S. Horne. 2009. Identifying and prioritizing ungulate migration 
routes for landscape‐level conservation. Ecological Applications 19(8):2016-2025. 
Sawyer, H., A. D. Middleton, M. M. Hayes, M. J. Kauffman, and K. L. Monteith. 2016. The extra mile: 
ungulate migration distance alters the use of seasonal range and exposure to anthropogenic 
risk. Ecosphere 7(10):1–11. 
Shields, A. V., R. T. Larsen, and J. C. Whiting. 2012. Summer watering patterns of mule deer in the Great 
Basin Desert, USA: Implications of differential use by individuals and the sexes for management 
of water resources. The Scientific World Journal 2012: Article ID 846218. 
Smith, J. W. 2008. Utah off-highway vehicle owners’ specialization and its relationship to 
environmental attitudes and motivations. Thesis, Utah State University, Logan, Utah USA. 
Smith, R. B. 1983. Mule deer reproduction and survival in the La Sal Mountains, Utah. Thesis, 
Utah State University, Logan, Utah, USA. 
Stewart, K. M., R. T. Bowyer, J. G. Kie, N. J. Cimon, and B. K. Johnson. 2002. Temporospatial distributions 
of elk, mule deer, and cattle: Resource partitioning and competition displacement. Journal of 
Mammalogy 83:229–244. 
Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2014–2018. Utah big game range trend studies. 
http://wildlife.utah.gov/range/Archive.htm. 
Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2024. Managing predatory wildlife species policy W1AG-4. 
Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2022. Emergency big game winter feeding policy W5Wld-02. 
Utah Office of Energy Development. 2014. http://energy.utah.gov/resource-areas/energy-
information/. 
van de Kerk, M., R. T. Larsen, D. D. Olson, K. R. Hersey, and B. R. McMillan. 2021. Variation in movement 
patterns of mule deer: have we oversimplified migration? Movement Ecology 9:1-12. 
WAFWA. 2003. Mule Deer: Changing landscapes, changing perspectives. Mule Deer Working Group, 
Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, USA. 
WAFWA. 2013. Understanding mule deer and winter feeding, fact sheet #2. Mule Deer Working Group, 
Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, USA. 

===== PAGE 34 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
Wallmo, O. C. 1978. Mule and black-tailed deer. Pages 31–41 in J. L. Schmidt and D. L. Gilbert, 
editors. Big Game of North America. Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, USA. 
Wallmo, O. C. 1981. Mule and black-tailed deer of North American. University of Nebraska Press, 
Lincoln, Nebraska, USA. 
Wasley, T., M. Fleming, B. Compton, T. Keegan, D. Lutz, D. Stroud, K. Gray, M. Cox, B. Johnson, C. 
McLaughlin, L. Carpenter, J. Carlson, and K. Urquhart. 2008. Habitat guidelines for mule deer: 
intermountain west ecoregion. Mule Deer Working Group, Western Association of Fish and 
Wildlife Agencies, USA. 
Watkins, B. E., C. J. Bishop, E. J. Bergman, A. Bronson, B. Hale, B. F. Wakeling, L. H. Carpenter, and D. W. 
Lutz. 2007. Habitat Guidelines for Mule Deer: Colorado Plateau Shrubland and Forest 
Ecoregion. Mule Deer Working Group, Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, USA. 
White, G. C. and R. M. Bartmann. 1998. Mule deer management – what should be monitored? Pages 
102–116 in C. Vos, Jr., editor. Proceedings of the 1997 deer-elk workshop, Rio Rico, 
Arizona. Arizona Game and Fish Department, Phoenix, Arizona, USA. 
Workman, G. W. and J. B. Low. 1976. Mule deer decline in the West—a symposium. Utah State 
University, Logan, Utah, USA. 

===== PAGE 35 =====
35 
Figure 1. Statewide trends in mule deer hunters afield and harvest, Utah 1925–2023. 
. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
36 
Figure 2. Statewide post-season buck-to-doe ratio estimates, Utah 1993–2023. 


===== PAGE 37 =====
37 
Figure 3. Statewide post-season mule deer population estimates, Utah 1992–2023. 


===== PAGE 38 =====
38 
Figure 4. Statewide post-season fawn-to-doe ratio estimates, Utah 1993–2023. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
39 
Figure 5. Mule deer habitat, Utah 2019. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
40 
Figure 6. Crucial mule deer habitat restoration priority areas, Utah 2019. 


===== PAGE 41 =====
41 
Figure 7. Locations of over 4,000 mule deer that were monitored with GPS tracking technology (data 
points on January 1st 2019-2023). 


===== PAGE 42 =====
42 
Figure 8. Mapped mule deer migration corridors through 2023 (unmapped areas black hash) 


===== PAGE 43 =====
43 
Table 1. General season unit observed buck-to-doe ratios and objectives, Utah 2021–2023. 
General season unit Unit # Objective 2021 2022 2023 3 year 
average 
Beaver, East* 22 15-17 14.8 17.3 20.4 17.5 
Beaver, West* 22 15-17 —- —- —- —-
Boulder/Kaiparowits 25C/26 15-17 20.5 24.6 30.8 25.3 
Box Elder 1 18-20 30.0 26.4 22.1 26.2 
Cache 2 15-17 22.0 20.4 18.8 20.4 
Cedar/Stansbury* 18A 15-17 —- —- —- —-
Chalk Creek 4 18-20 24.9 28.0 24.1 25.7 
East Canyon 5 18-20 27.8 24.2 21.9 24.6 
Fillmore 15-17 18.7 18.3 23.9 20.3 
Fishlake 25A 15-17 20.4 21.4 24.3 22.0 
Kamas 7 18-20 20.9 24.1 23.0 22.7 
La Sal, La Sal Mtns 13A 15-17 16.4 26.1 17.4 20.0 
Manti/San Rafael 16B/12 15-17 20.1 22.0 18.9 20.3 
Monroe 23 15-17 16.7 18.4 20.8 18.6 
Morgan-South Rich 6 18-20 26.6 28.6 21.3 25.5 
Mt. Dutton 24 15-17 17.4 20.6 22.3 20.1 
Nebo 16A 15-17 21.0 21.0 17.4 19.8 
Nine Mile 11 18-20 16.9 15.7 22.5 18.4 
North Slope 8 15-17 19.3 20.4 19.7 19.8 
Ogden 3 18-20 23.0 22.8 20.0 22.0 
Oquirrh/Tintic* 18B 18-20 —- —- —- —-
Panguitch Lake 28 15-17 20.4 17.8 22.6 20.3 
Pine V alley 30 18-20 16.1 19.4 22.6 19.4 
San Juan, Abajo Mtns 14A 15-17 22.6 19.9 17.1 19.9 
Southwest Desert 20 15-17 15.6 21.3 21.5 19.5 
V ernal/Bonanza 9DB 15-17 16.9 20.4 16.1 17.8 
Wasatch Mtns, East 17BC 15-17 20.8 25.8 25.0 23.9 
Wasatch Mtns, West 17A 15–17 14.8 15.6 15.3 15.2 
West Desert, Swasey* 19D 15–17 —- —- —- —-
Y ellowstone 9A 18–20 18.4 20.7 18.6 19.3 
Zion 29 18–20 17.8 20.9 24.1 20.9 
*New general season unit this plan 

===== PAGE 44 =====
44 
Table 2. Premium limited-entry unit observed buck-to-doe ratios and objectives, Utah 2021–2023. 
Premium limited-entry unit Objective 2021 2022 2023 3 year 
average 
Henry Mtns Buck-to-doe ratio 40–45 40.1 35.5 54.8 43.5 
Paunsaugunt Buck-to-doe ratio 40–45 43.9 42.4 45.9 44.1 
Table 3. Limited-entry unit observed buck-to-doe ratios and objectives, Utah 2021–2023. 
Limited-entry unit Objective 2021 2022 2023 3 year 
average 
Cache, Crawford Mtn 25–30 17.6 21.8 21.8 20.4 
South Slope, Diamond Mtn 25–30 32.9 31.4 32.9 32.4 
Book Cliffs 25–30 26.5 33.1 37.2 32.3 
La Sal, Dolores Triangle 25–30 25.0 28.8 27.2 27.0 
San Juan, Elk Ridge 25–30 43.6 33.9 33.9 37.1 
Thousand Lakes* 25–30 21.1 24.6 18.7 21.5 
West Desert, V ernon 25–30 22.6 31.0 35.4 29.6 
Fillmore, Oak Creek 25–30 37.2 43.2 32.2 37.5 
*New limited-entry unit this plan 

===== PAGE 45 =====
45 
Table 4. Estimated survival of adult and fawn mule deer monitored by satellite GPS collars, Utah 
2013–2023. 
Unit Y ear Adult Survival Fawn Survival 
Book Cliffs 2017–2018 0.64 0.54 
2018–2019 0.69 0.61 
2019–2020 0.81 0.67 
2020-2021 0.84 0.24 
2021-2022 0.85 0.60 
2022-2023 0.94 —-
Cache 2013–2014 0.82 0.77 
2014–2015 0.92 0.79 
2015–2016 0.84 0.27 
2016–2017 0.71 0.10 
2017–2018 0.91 0.59 
2018–2019 0.67 0.06 
2019–2020 0.82 0.25 
2020-2021 0.92 0.56 
2021-2022 0.88 0.61 
2022-2023 0.53 0.05 
Monroe 2013–2014 0.82 0.86 
2014–2015 0.82 0.75 
2015–2016 0.79 0.44 
2016–2017 0.75 0.38 
2017–2018 0.76 0.41 
2018–2019 0.71 0.58 
2019–2020 0.76 0.31 
2020-2021 0.74 0.30 
2021-2022 0.77 0.55 
2022-2023 0.81 0.74 
Oquirrh-Stansbury 2013–2014 0.80 0.78 
2014–2015 0.78 0.61 
2015–2016 0.72 0.27 
2016–2017 0.72 0.18 
2017–2018 0.82 0.81 
2018–2019 0.62 0.35 
2019–2020 0.76 0.53 
2020-2021 0.80 0.54 
2021-2022 0.91 0.54 
2022-2023 0.75 0.44 
Pine V alley 2013–2014 0.84 0.93 
2014–2015 0.86 0.90 
2015–2016 0.89 0.41 
2016–2017 0.84 0.50 

===== PAGE 46 =====
46 
2017–2018 0.79 0.43 
2018–2019 0.90 0.53 
2019–2020 0.80 0.63 
2020-2021 0.77 0.47 
2021-2022 0.83 0.63 
2022-2023 0.77 0.72 
San Juan 2013–2014 0.86 0.79 
2014–2015 0.84 0.71 
2015–2016 0.80 0.71 
2016–2017 0.75 0.41 
2017–2018 0.73 0.00 
2018–2019 0.76 0.27 
2019–2020 0.90 0.72 
2020-2021 0.91 0.47 
2021-2022 0.88 0.36 
2022-2023 0.84 0.53 
South Slope 2013–2014 0.93 0.83 
2014–2015 0.82 0.93 
2015–2016 0.78 0.59 
2016–2017 0.71 0.18 
2017–2018 0.88 0.75 
2018–2019 0.67 0.24 
2019–2020 0.83 0.61 
2020-2021 0.82 0.35 
2021-2022 0.92 0.61 
2022-2023 0.73 0.19 
Manti 2013–2014 0.81 0.80 
2014–2015 0.82 0.69 
2015–2016 0.81 0.31 
2016–2017 0.80 0.53 
2017–2018 0.77 0.75 
2018–2019 0.83 0.39 
2019–2020 0.73 0.71 
2020-2021 0.82 0.48 
2021-2022 0.90 0.58 
2022-2023 0.74 0.18 
Statewide 2013–2014 0.84 0.82 
2014–2015 0.84 0.77 
2015–2016 0.80 0.43 
2016–2017 0.79 0.30 
2017–2018 0.79 0.53 
2018–2019 0.75 0.37 
2019–2020 0.79 0.61 
2020-2021 0.79 0.39 

===== PAGE 47 =====
47 
2021-2022 0.87 0.59 
2022-2023 0.72 0.40 
Table 5. Probable causes of mortality for GPS collared adult female and fawn mule deer, Utah 2014–2023 
(n=1765). 
Mortality Cause n % 
Birth complication 10 <1 
Disease 43 2 
Hunter harvest 24 1 
Malnutrition 229 13 
Poaching 15 <1 
Predation, bear 3 <1 
Predation, bobcat 21 1 
Predation, cougar 454 26 
Predation, coyote 327 19 
Predation, domestic dog 3 <1 
Predation, golden eagle 1 <1 
Roadkill 118 7 
Train 2 <1 
Unknown 475 27 

===== PAGE 48 =====
48 
Table 6. December ingesta-free body fat (IFBF) values for adult female mule deer by management unit, Utah 2014–2023. 
Blue - highest recorded value 
Gold - lowest recorded value 

===== PAGE 49 =====
49 
Table 7. Limited-entry and general-season odds of obtaining a permit, Utah 1998–2024. 
Permit type Y ear Resident odds Nonresident odds Overall odds 
Limited entry 1998 1 in 7.5 1 in 19.7 1 in 8.3 
1999 1 in 7.9 1 in 16.3 1 in 8.5 
2000 1 in 8.9 1 in 14.4 1 in 9.3 
2001 1 in 9.9 1 in 18.1 1 in 10.6 
2002 1 in 12.8 1 in 24.8 1 in 13.8 
2003 1 in 15.2 1 in 34.0 1 in 16.7 
2004 1 in 17.2 1 in 40.4 1 in 19.1 
2005 1 in 19.5 1 in 48.3 1 in 21.7 
2006 1 in 19.9 1 in 49.7 1 in 22.1 
2007 1 in 21.0 1 in 62.2 1 in 23.7 
2008 1 in 20.6 1 in 48.2 1 in 22.5 
2009 1 in 19.8 1 in 74.1 1 in 23.8 
2010 1 in 20.3 1 in 72.1 1 in 24.3 
2011 1 in 21.3 1 in 76.5 1 in 25.5 
2012 1 in 23.5 1 in 79.0 1 in 27.9 
2013 1 in 27.1 1 in 98.4 1 in 32.5 
2014 1 in 28.7 1 in 108.8 1 in 34.8 
2015 1 in 26.8 1 in 92.9 1 in 32.4 
2016 1 in 24.9 1 in 91.1 1 in 30.4 
2017 1 in 26.1 1 in 98.3 1 in 32.5 
2018 1 in 26.0 1 in 111.5 1 in 33.1 
2019 1 in 25.6 1 in 117.2 1 in 33.2 
2020 1 in 23.9 1 in 112.6 1 in 31.4 
2021 1 in 28.5 1 in 134.3 1 in 37.6 
2022 1 in 28.2 1 in 141.4 1 in 37.7 
2023 1 in 25.6 1 in 138.2 1 in 34.8 
2024 1 in 25.4 1 in 134.7 1 in 34.7 
General season 2000 — — 1 in 1.1 
2001 1 in 1.2 1 in 1.6 1 in 1.2 
2002 1 in 1.3 1 in 1.7 1 in 1.3 
2003 1 in 1.3 1 in 1.9 1 in 1.3 
2004 1 in 1.3 1 in 1.7 1 in 1.3 
2005 1 in 1.4 1 in 1.7 1 in 1.4 
2006 1 in 1.3 1 in 1.7 1 in 1.4 
2007 1 in 1.4 1 in 1.7 1 in 1.5 
2008 1 in 1.4 1 in 1.5 1 in 1.4 
2009 1 in 1.4 1 in 1.5 1 in 1.4 
2010 1 in 1.3 1 in 1.4 1 in 1.3 
2011 1 in 1.4 1 in 1.5 1 in 1.4 
2012 1 in 1.5 1 in 1.8 1 in 1.5 

===== PAGE 50 =====
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
50 
1 in 1.6 1 in 1.8 1 in 1.6 
1 in 1.7 1 in 2.1 1 in 1.7 
1 in 1.8 1 in 2.1 1 in 1.8 
1 in 1.8 1 in 2.1 1 in 1.8 
1 in 1.9 1 in 2.2 1 in 1.9 
1 in 1.9 1 in 2.3 1 in 1.9 
1 in 1.9 1 in 2.3 1 in 1.9 
1 in 2.1 1 in 2.6 1 in 2.1 
1 in 2.5 1 in 3.0 1 in 2.5 
1 in 2.4 1 in 2.9 1 in 2.5 
1 in 2.6 1 in 2.6 1 in 2.6 
1 in 2.3 1 in 2.2 1 in 2.3 

===== PAGE 51 =====
51 
Appendix A. 
Utah Division of Wildlife Resources 
Chronic Wasting Disease Management Plan 
Goals of the plan: 
The goals of this plan are to provide adaptable directions for management and prevention of spread of 
Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) in free-ranging deer (Odocoileus hemionus), elk (Cervus elaphus), and 
moose (Alces alces) in Utah. The disease has been present in Utah for at least two decades, and 
eradication, although desired, is likely not realistic at this point in time. Specific objectives addressed in 
this plan are to 1) reduce the rate of spread and prevalence of Chronic Wasting Disease in Utah; 2) 
provide guidelines for response to detection of new infection foci; 3) communicate with the public and 
participate in scientific research. 
Background: 
Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) is a neurodegenerative disease of deer, elk, moose, and 
caribou/reindeer caused by infectious proteinaceous particles called prions (Haley 2015). The disease is 
classified as a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) similarly to bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy in cattle, scrapie in sheep, and kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease in humans (Haley 
2015). Incubation time from infection to clinical signs averages at approximately 16 months (Williams & 
Miller 2002). Clinical symptoms in affected animals can vary but can include progressive weight loss, 
behavioral changes, ataxia, excessive salivation, head tremor, aimless wandering, and always results in 
death of the affected animal (Williams 2005; Haley 2015). In infected animals, prions are predominantly 
present in nervous and lymphoid tissues, but have also been detected in antler velvet, muscle, saliva, 
blood, intestinal tract, bladder, urine, feces, and fetal tissues (Henderson et al. 2015; Angers et al. 2006; 
Mathiason et al. 2006; Angers et al. 2009; Haley et al. 2011; Nalls et al. 2021). Transmission can occur 
directly from animal to animal via contact with infectious body fluids (Haley 2015), however, prions are 
highly resistant in the environment and environmental contamination may contribute to the spread of 
the disease (Miller 2004; Miller et al. 2004; Haley 2015). 
Chronic wasting disease can have consequences for both free ranging and captive populations. Studies 
have shown that CWD can cause declines in free-ranging deer populations, especially with high disease 
prevalence (Wasserberg et al. 2009; Edmunds et al. 2016) and environmental persistence (Almberg et al. 
2011). Survival studies in deer and elk utilizing radio collars showed that CWD infected animals have 
lower survival, consequently leading to lower population growth rates (Miller et al. 2008; Monello et al. 
2014; Geremia et al. 2015; DeVivo et al. 2017). Chronic wasting disease continues to be a major concern 
for the domestic cervid industry, and is a concern in Utah’s domestic cervids. 
To date, CWD has been detected in multiple US states and Canadian provinces (for a map of the current 
distribution visit http://cwd-info.org/map-chronic-wasting-disease-in-north-america/, as well as in 
Norway (Benestad et al. 2016), Finland, and South Korea (Sohn et al. 2002; Kim et al. 2005). The disease 
has mainly spread to new areas via natural animal migrations, translocations of cervids, and escape of 
CWD infected cervids from captive facilities (Miller & Fischer 2016). Other risk factors may include 
transport of infected carcasses or animal products such as urine, saliva, feces etc., and artificially 
concentrating animals through baiting or feeding (Miller & Fischer 2016). 

===== PAGE 52 =====
52 
Chronic Wasting Disease in Utah: 
The Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR) first began conducting CWD surveillance in 1998 upon 
the request of the Center for Disease Control and Prevention. The first case of CWD was found in a 
hunter-killed buck taken near Vernal in Uintah County in 2002. To date, 254 mule deer and six elk have 
tested positive for CWD in 13 Wildlife Management Units (WMU) statewide (Figure 1). The highest 
prevalence in Utah is found in WMU 13 in the La Sal Mountains where the proportion of CWD positive 
samples have varied between 0 – 25% since 2003 with an increasing trend (Table 1, Figure 2). The 
proportion of CWD positive samples have varied between 0 and 20% in the other positive WMU’s (5, 8, 
9, 11, 14, 16) but also with an increasing trend (Table 1, Figure 2). The disease appears to be slowly 
spreading, with potential exponential growth within the past couple of years. To date, only six elk and no 
moose have tested positive for CWD in Utah. 
Deer continue to test positive near Myton, which is located in the western part of unit 9. It has grown to 
be a larger CWD hotspot with the majority of positives in that area of the state occurring near Myton, 
although there has been an increase in prevalence around Vernal. A CWD hunt was started in 2020 for 
antlerless deer to reduce densities and a late season muzzleloader buck hunt in 2022. The success has 
been varied. 
A new infection foci was detected in the East Canyon unit around Bountiful beginning in 2021, which has 
included mostly resident, town deer. After sampling for two years, the prevalence is around 20%. There 
is an ongoing effort to collect more samples in the area to calculate a more accurate prevalence along 
with collaring efforts to determine the deer’s home range and connectivity to other herds. . 
Domestic elk ranching is administered through the Utah Department of Agriculture and Food (UDAF). 
There have been positive CWD cases in captive facilities over the past five years, with several of them 
quarantined at this time. Due to Canada’s high prevalence of CWD in Alberta and Saskatchewan, options 
for importation are limited. Spread of CWD from domestic to wild cervids and from free-ranging to 
captive populations continues to be a significant concern. 

===== PAGE 53 =====
53 
Figure 1: Locations of CWD positive deer and elk in Utah from 2002-2024. 

===== PAGE 54 =====
54 
Table 1. Total number of samples collected (Total) and number (Positive) and percent positive (%) mule deer in CWD positive units in Utah from 
2002 – 2024. In addition to the data shown in the table, six elk have tested positive for CWD during this time period, one in Unit 9, four in Unit 
13, and one in Unit 16. 


===== PAGE 55 =====
55 
Figure 2: The polygons are 95% confidence interval for the curve. The curve is a fit to a logistic regression 
of prevalence (# positives, total # tests) against the year. The lines run to 95% confidence intervals fit 
separately to each unit-year. 
Risk factors for spread of CWD and options for management: 
Once CWD is established in a population it is unlikely to be eradicated. Currently, there are no effective 
treatments or vaccines available for CWD. At the time of writing of this plan, Utah first detected CWD in 
its cervid population almost 2 decades ago. The goal of CWD management in Utah is therefore to slow 
the spatial spread of the disease, to prevent further increase in CWD prevalences in affected areas, and 
detect new infection foci as early as possible. As deer are more susceptible to CWD than elk and moose, 
CWD management actions and sampling efforts will therefore primarily target mule deer populations at 
this time, as a reduction in CWD prevalence in mule deer likely will reduce the spread of the disease to 
other cervid species as well. 
Chronic wasting disease prions can persist in the environment (Almberg et al. 2011), and environmental 
contamination may contribute to transmission of the disease within infected areas. Deliberate, localized 
reduction of population densities (“hot-spot culling”) has been utilized by multiple states and may be 
effective in reducing CWD prevalences locally. However, sustained actions are needed in order to achieve 
long term effects, and these efforts have therefore yielded mixed results (Miller & Fischer 2016; Wolfe 
2018). 
Male deer are more likely to be infected than females (Miller et al. 2000; Grear et al. 2006; Rees et al. 
2012), and statistical modeling has shown that harvest management may be most effective when 

===== PAGE 56 =====
56 
focused on antlered deer (Jennelle et al. 2014; Potapov et al. 2016). Bucks over 4 years of age are more 
likely to be infected with CWD (Miller & Conner 2005), and targeting older age bucks may therefore be a 
tool for reducing CWD prevalences. Hunts later in the hunting season and during the rut appear to be 
especially effective in increasing adult male harvest and may therefore be an effective tool for targeting 
this age group. Research is currently underway to better understand the effect of different harvest 
strategies on CWD prevalences and spread. 
Other risk factors for spread of CWD include movements of animals and animal parts (Williams & Miller 
2003), and artificial concentration of cervids through baiting and feeding (Fischer & Davidson 2005). 
Implementing and enforcing carcass import regulations, reducing artificial concentration of wild cervids 
by prohibiting baiting and feeding, and avoiding translocation of wild cervids are therefore management 
options that may reduce the risk of CWD transmission. 
The Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (WAFWA) published Recommendations for 
adaptive management of Chronic Wasting Disease in the West (WAFWA 2017), which outlines possible 
CWD management strategies and recommendations for how to evaluate their effectiveness. Some of 
these recommendations have been incorporated in this plan. 
Human health risks associated with CWD: 
To date there has been no direct evidence that CWD is transmissible to humans (CDC 2018). A study 
investigated the occurrence of prion associated diseases over time in a CWD infected area of Colorado 
and did not find evidence of a higher incidence of prion associated diseases in residents (MaWhinney et 
al. 2006). Further, transgenic mice with human prion proteins, failed to develop the disease when 
exposed to elk CWD prions (Kong et al. 2005). Recently, a Canadian study successfully infected 
cynomolgus macaques by intracranial and oral routes (Czub 2017), however, a study by Race et al. 2018 
reported no infection of the same species 11-13 years after experimental inoculation with CWD prions. 
The UDWR maintains a website with information on CWD in the state and beyond and provides general 
advice on how to reduce the risk of exposure. Hunters are advised not to harvest animals that appear 
sick or eat meat from suspect or positive animals. The following simple precautions are recommended 
when handling the carcass of any deer, elk, or moose: 
o Do not handle or consume wild game animals that appear sick. Instead, contact your 
local DWR office and notify them of the location of the sick animal. 
o Do not consume meat from animals known to be infected with CWD. 
o Wear rubber or latex gloves when field-dressing big game. 
o On all deer, bone out the meat, and avoid consuming the brain, spinal cord, eyes, spleen 
and lymph nodes of harvested animals. 
o Minimize handling of soft tissues and fluids. Wash hands with soap and warm water 
after handling any parts of the carcass. 
o Knives, saws, and cutting table surfaces should be disinfected using a solution of 50 
percent household bleach for at least an hour. 
o Please contact the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources for additional information or if 
you see a sick animal while hunting. 

===== PAGE 57 =====
57 
Objectives of the plan: 
1. Reduce the rate of spread of Chronic Wasting Disease in Utah and reduce the CWD prevalence in 
infected areas 
2. Provide guidelines for response to detection of new infection foci 
3. Communicate with the public and participate in scientific research 
Objective 1) Reduce the rate of spread and prevalence of CWD: 
This objective will be reached through the following strategies a) surveillance, b) harvest management, c) 
reducing risk of importing infected carcasses from other states by carcass import restrictions, d) 
restricting baiting and feeding of wildlife, e) limiting the translocation of wild cervids, f) prohibiting the 
rehabilitation of wild cervids, g) implementing clear requirements for disease testing of domestic cervids 
that are overseen by UDWR, and h) providing guidelines for proper carcass disposal. 
Strategies to achieve objective 1: 
a) Surveillance: 
The UDWR has conducted CWD surveillance since 2002. To date, the surveillance has consisted of 
sampling hunter harvested animals in all wildlife management units across the state on a rotational 
schedule, sampling vehicle killed and other animals in areas with urban deer translocation programs, 
sample and test any symptomatic cervid, and test all cervids submitted for post mortem examination to 
the diagnostic laboratory for any reason. In addition, elk have been sampled opportunistically in areas 
where CWD has been confirmed. The sample efforts are designed to be able to detect ≥1% prevalence of 
CWD with 95% confidence and employs a weighted surveillance strategy (Walsh 2012). In this system, 
animals that are more likely to be infected (e.g. a symptomatic animal, vehicle killed animals, or adult 
bucks), are given a higher weight than animals considered at lower risk for being infected with CWD, (e.g. 
fawns or yearlings). An overview of the weights allocated to each sample type is shown in Table 2. 
Table 2: Relative sample weights (points) associated with demographic groups of deer and elk for 
weighted surveillance of Chronic Wasting Disease. The weights were developed based on mule deer data 
from Colorado (Walsh 2012). 
Weight and species 
Demographic group Mule deer Elk 
Symptomatic female 13.6 18.75 
Symptomatic male 11.5 8.57 
Road-killed male/female, all ages except fawns/calves 1.9 0.41 
Other mortalities (predation, other unexplained in adults and 
yearlings) 
1.9 0.41 
Harvest, adult males 1 1.16 
Harvest, adult females 0.56 1.00 
Harvest, yearling males 0.19 N/A 
Harvest, yearling females 0.33 0.23 
Harvest, fawns/calves 0.001 N/A 

===== PAGE 58 =====
58 
The required sample size for determining a ≥1% prevalence of CWD with 95% confidence is 304 deer and 
346 elk (due to lower test sensitivity in elk), using standard equations for determining freedom of 
disease (Dohoo 2010). Currently, the positive WMU’s are sampled annually, whereas the WMU’s 
considered free of CWD are sampled every 5 years on average in clusters of 2-3 units together. Table 3 is 
showing the sampling units that have been combined since 2006. 
Hunter harvested samples are collected at check stations, meat processors, regional offices, and 
taxidermists. From each animal, the retropharyngeal lymph nodes will be collected. The obex may also 
be sampled if lymph nodes are not available. Samples will be screened for CWD with an 
Enzyme-Linked-Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA), and positives confirmed with Immunohistochemistry (IHC) 
at a National Animal Health Laboratory Network-accredited laboratory (Utah Veterinary Diagnostic 
Laboratory). Hunters who wish to have their animals tested from areas outside of the test zones can 
continue to do so at their own expense. 
Test results are made available online for hunters to check on the DWR website. If an animal is positive, 
the hunter is contacted and, if the hunter agrees, the meat and antlers will be confiscated and properly 
disposed of. 
Table 3: Wildlife management unit clusters sampled for CWD since 2006 in Utah. 
Year Wildlife Management Units sampled (mainly hunter harvest) Urban 
2006-07 2,3,4 5,6,7 10,11 17 21,23,25 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2007-08 2,3,4 6-7 * 17 21,23,25 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2008-09 2,3,4 5,6,7 * 17 23,24,25 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2009-10 2,3,4 * * * 21,22 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2010-11 2,3,4 * * * 27,28,29,30 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2011-12 * * 10,11 * * 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2012-13 * * * * * 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2013-14 2,3,4 * * * * 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2014-15 * 5,6,7 * 17 * 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2015-16 2,3,4 * * 17 * 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2016-17 2,3,4 * * * 23,24,25 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2017-18 2,3,4 * 10,11 * * 8,9 16 13,14 5, 17,18,19 
2018-19 * 5,6,7 10,11 17 21,22 8,9 16 13,14 5, 17,18,19 
2019-20 * 5,6,7 10,11 17 21,22 8,9 16 13,14 * 
2020-21 1,2,3 * 10,11 17,19 
20,27,28,29, 
30 * * * 18 
2021-22 1,4 5,6 10,11 19 23,24,25,26 8,9 16 * 18 
2022-23 4 5,6,7 11 17 27,28,29,30 8,9 * 13,14 * 
2023-24 4 5,6 11,12 17 20,21,22 9 15,16 * 18 
2024-25 2,3 5 
10,11, 
12 * 23,24,25 9 16 13,14 5 

===== PAGE 59 =====
59 
Ongoing strategy for hunter harvest surveillance: 
Rotational hunter harvest surveillance: 
The rotational hunter harvest surveillance will continue by targeting a cluster of 2-3 units at least every 5 
years using the weighted surveillance approach. Known positive units will also be included in the 
rotational surveillance instead of being sampled every year. A suggested 5- year rotational schedule is 
outlined in Table 4. 
Compulsory testing and other strategies to increase sample size: 
In Utah, it has become increasingly difficult to obtain adequate sample sizes to achieve statistically 
meaningful results. Beginning in the fall of 2020, compulsory testing may be introduced in units that are 
being surveyed in a given year. Compulsory testing could entail sampling a subset or all of harvested deer 
in a given unit and year. Additional strategies to increase the number of CWD samples may include 
sending letters to hunters to request their participation in the CWD surveillance program, providing 
freezers in convenient locations where hunters can leave the head of their harvested animal, hiring 
additional staff during the hunting season, having hunters collect and submit their own samples, and 
working with meat processors and taxidermist to obtain samples. 
Table 4: Possible 5-year rotational schedule for sampling of hunter harvested mule deer across Utah. 
Year Units 
Year 1 1 23,24,25 12,15,16 
Year 2 2,3,4 17 13,14 
Year 3 5,6,7 10,11 8,9 
Year 4 18,19 20,21,22 21,23,24 
Year 5 22,24,28 27,28,29,30 -
Year 6 Rotation begins from the top 
b) Harvest management: 
Hunting is an important tool to manage cervid populations in Utah and continues to be the most 
effective source of surveillance samples. Harvest management may also be the most effective tool to 
reduce spread and reduce or maintain low CWD prevalences. Research has also shown that it may be 
most effective when focused on antlered deer (Jennelle et al. 2014; Potapov et al. 2016). To date, most 
of the CWD positive units in Utah have been managed at low buck to doe ratios, which may have 
contributed to the relatively low prevalence of CWD in Utah thus far (Conner et al, 2021). However, 
despite these efforts, the prevalence appears to be rising, and as the disease spreads, changes to existing 
harvest management will likely be necessary in order to prevent further spread of disease in the state. 
Bucks over 4 years of age are more likely to be infected with CWD (Miller & Conner 2005), and targeting 
older age bucks may therefore be a tool for reducing CWD prevalences (WAFWA, 2017). Hunts later in 
the hunting season and during and after the rut appear to be effective in increasing harvest of older 
aged bucks infected with CWD (Conner et al., 2000). 

===== PAGE 60 =====
60 
Further, CWD does not occur randomly distributed over the landscape, but CWD positive animals are 
often harvested from within smaller focal areas. This is known because hunters that harvest CWD 
positive animals are requested to provide an approximate GPS location of harvest. An increase in sample 
size of animals tested for CWD, e.g. through compulsory testing, may facilitate more effective 
identification of disease hotspots. More accurately locating disease hotspots could enable managers to 
increase harvest within those focal areas with the goal of removing more CWD positive animals. 
Strategies to use harvest management as a tool to reduce the spread of CWD: 
Data from Colorado suggests that after initial introduction of CWD into an area, CWD prevalence slowly 
increases but remains < 5 % for years. However, when an ~5% infection rate is reached, the increase in 
CWD prevalence becomes exponential and population impacts become detectable (Colorado Parks and 
Wildlife, 2018). In Colorado, a 5% prevalence is also the threshold for mandatory management action to 
reduce the prevalence of CWD (Colorado Parks and Wildlife, 2018). In Utah, a 5% prevalence of infection 
likely has been reached in Unit 13 (La Sal Mountains), whereas in some other units, the prevalence is 
likely still below 2%, but also with an increasing trend. Because Utah still has a relatively low prevalence 
of CWD, setting the threshold for action at 5% would result in years of inaction while waiting for the 
prevalence to become higher. The consequence would not only be more disease in the populations, but 
also spread of CWD from its current infection foci to other areas. Potentially, valuable limited entry units 
bordering CWD positive areas could be infected if the prevalence is not kept at the lowest level possible. 
Consequently, in order to reduce the risk of an increase in prevalence and spread of CWD, the threshold 
for implementation of CWD management actions in Utah should be set at detection of CWD. Currently, 
the CWD surveillance program is aimed at detecting a ~1% prevalence of CWD with 95% confidence. 
Based on this surveillance program, the threshold for taking action should therefore be set at the 
detection of the first CWD positive, which, if sample sizes are met, likely would mean that the CWD 
prevalence is ~1%. The type of action taken in a unit should be decided by the regional biologist, in 
consultation with the big game and wildlife health programs. 
One or more of the following harvest management strategies can be implemented in units with ≥1% 
prevalence of CWD: 
o The buck to doe ratio of each unit is outlined in the unit management plans. If CWD is present in 
a unit, the buck to doe ratio should be kept at the lowest end of the range outlined in the plan. 
o Late season buck hunts may be implemented within focal hotspot areas within CWD positive 
units. The goal of such hunts is to target prime age class bucks that are more likely to be infected 
with CWD. The boundaries of such “hotspot” areas will be determined by the DWR veterinarian, 
regional biologists and managers and be based on previous CWD surveillance, deer movement 
data, and location of winter ranges. These boundaries may be changed if CWD spreads from the 
original infection foci. 
o If CWD is detected in units with higher buck to doe ratios, a late season hunt can be 
implemented immediately to target prime age class bucks. The area in which the late season 
hunt is implemented should be determined by the area biologist and wildlife managers based on 
knowledge of deer movements and location of winter ranges. In addition, change in hunt 
management to lower the buck to doe ratio across the unit should be considered. 
o Issuance of more buck and doe hunting licenses to lower the population density. 

===== PAGE 61 =====
61 
o Shifting of the harvest to later in the season during and after the rut to target prime age class 
bucks that are more likely to be infected with CWD. 
o In extreme cases, adding a unit wide hunt later in the season during or after the rut to target 
prime age class bucks and increase overall harvest. 
o Increasing harvest on private land and in urban areas by increasing collaboration with private 
landowners, wildlife management areas, cities, counties and other entities including issuing buck 
deer permit vouchers to cooperating landowners. 
In order to reduce focal disease hotspots, managers could consider the following management options in 
addition to late season buck hunting: 
o Increase the overall number of tags within a focal hotspot area. 
o Add doe hunts within focal hot spot areas. 
Ideally, the effectiveness of new management strategies should be evaluated over a period of at least 
10-15 years (2-3 sampling rotations). Additionally, any implementation of targeted strategies (e.g. late 
season buck hunts within focal hotspot areas) should involve additional annual CWD monitoring to 
determine the prevalence of CWD within the focal area and longer term effectiveness of the strategy. As 
new science becomes available additional CWD management strategies may be added to this plan. 
c) Carcass import restrictions: 
The import of deer, elk and moose carcasses from known infection areas is prohibited. Only meat that is 
cut and wrapped either commercially or privately, quarters or other portion of meat with no part of the 
spinal column or head attached, meat that is boned out, hides with no heads attached, skulls or skull 
plates with antlers attached that have been cleaned of all brain matter and spinal column tissue, antlers 
with no meat or tissue attached, upper canine teeth known as buglers, whistlers or ivories, and finished 
taxidermy heads are allowed. The Division keeps a list of states, provinces, game management units, 
equivalent wildlife management units, or counties on their website, from which it is prohibited to import 
carcasses, except for the parts listed above. Prohibiting import from infected units or counties instead of 
from entire states that have CWD, significantly increases the risk of bringing in an infected carcass as 
finding CWD is very dependent on the quality of the surveillance. 
Strategy to reduce risk of importing CWD infected carcasses through import restrictions: 
It is prohibited to import carcasses, except for the carcass parts listed below from any state where CWD 
has been detected. Additional states may be added as necessary. 
Permitted parts: Only the following parts of wild deer, elk and moose may be imported from states with 
confirmed CWD: 
o Meat that is cut and wrapped either commercially or privately 
o Quarters or other portion of meat with no part of the spinal column or head attached 
o Meat that is boned out 
o Hides with no heads attached 
o Skulls and skull plates with antlers attached that have been cleaned of all brain matter and spinal 
column matter 
o Antlers with no meat or tissue attached 
o Upper canine teeth known as buglers, whistlers or ivories 

===== PAGE 62 =====
62 
o Finished taxidermy heads 
d) Baiting and feeding: 
Baiting and feeding of wildlife in Utah is currently legal and unregulated. However, with the exception of 
the elk feeding ground at Hardware Ranch in northern Utah, state managed feeding of wildlife only 
occurs on a very limited basis during extreme winter conditions. Baiting and feeding by private 
individuals may occur but the extent is unknown. 
Strategy to reduce the risk of CWD transmission through artificial concentration of cervids: 
Artificial concentration of wild cervids can facilitate transmission of CWD and should be avoided. Even 
during emergency conditions such as extreme winters, UDWR will not feed cervids in areas where CWD 
has been detected, or in high risk areas where CWD is suspected. All intentional feeding of wild cervids 
by private individuals should be limited to the largest extent possible. The UDWR will educate the public 
about the disease risks associated with feeding of wildlife. 
e) Translocation of cervids: 
Import and translocation of cervids significantly increases the risk of spreading CWD, and has been the 
single most important factor in spreading CWD in North America (Miller & Fischer 2016). 
Strategies to reduce risk of spread of CWD through translocation of cervids: 
The UDWR should not allow for import of free-ranging or captive deer (Odocoileus sp.), free-ranging elk 
(Cervus elaphus sp.), or free-ranging or captive moose (Alces alces) into Utah. The UDWR has previously 
translocated free-ranging cervids within the state from areas considered free of CWD. Such 
translocations carry significant risk of spreading undetected infections and should be limited to the 
largest extent possible. Translocation of moose away from urban areas is permitted within the same unit. 
f) Rehabilitation: 
Rehabilitation can lead to an unnatural mixing and concentration of wild cervids with unknown 
background and infection status, and it increases the risk of moving cervids from one area of the state to 
the other. Further, rehabilitated deer don’t always acclimate well to natural conditions when released 
back into the wild, and these animals often congregate in urban areas resulting in nuisance and public 
safety concerns. 
Strategy to reduce risk of spreading CWD through wildlife rehabilitation: 
The Utah DWR prohibits the rehabilitation of deer, moose, or elk of any age in order to prevent the 
mixing of potentially infected and non-infected animals. 
g) Alternative livestock species: 
Domesticated elk: 

===== PAGE 63 =====
63 
Captive elk ranching is overseen by the UDAF. The Division will continue to collaborate with UDAF on 
captive elk ranching, prevention of ingress and egress of wild cervids, and finding sustainable solutions 
to reduce the risk of CWD transmission between captive and wild cervids. If wild deer are found in 
captive elk facilities, owners may apply for certificate of registration (COR) to lethally remove wild deer, 
in accordance with R657-71. 
Fallow deer and reindeer: 
Keeping of fallow deer and reindeer in Utah requires the possession of a valid COR issued by the UDWR. 
A recent rule change resulted in no new reindeer facilities being approved, but current COR holders are 
grandfathered in. Facilities must meet the standards for keeping fallow deer and reindeer as outlined in 
the COR, and no permit can be issued before a facility inspection has been conducted and the facility 
approved. Each fallow deer and reindeer must be identified with a unique identification, and a full herd 
inventory consisting of ID number, age, sex, disposition, place of origin, place to where the animal was 
sold (if sold) must be submitted annually. Any animal that dies for any reason must be tested for chronic 
wasting disease (retropharyngeal lymph nodes and/or obex) at a National Animal Health Laboratory 
Network (NAHLN) approved laboratory (such as the Utah Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory) and the test 
results reported to the UDWR with the annual report. The Division has the right to conduct 
unannounced inspections at any time to determine whether the reported inventory is correct. Failure to 
comply with these regulations will lead to revocation of the COR. 
h) Carcass disposal: 
Disposal of infected carcasses is a concern for environmental contamination, and potentially could be a 
source of spread of CWD. 
Strategy to avoid CWD spread through carcass disposal: 
Incineration, alkaline hydrolysis tissue digestion, and burial in an approved, active landfill are considered 
suitable methods for carcass disposal (AFWA 2018). The DWR will continue to educate hunters, the 
public, meat processors, and taxidermists about the risk of CWD, and appropriate carcass disposal 
methods. Hunters and meat processors are encouraged to help prevent the spread of CWD by following 
management practices such as a) processing the carcass in the field and thereby not move it out of the 
area of origin, b) disposing carcasses by burial in a landfill, or c) disposing unused animal parts and wild 
game meat in double bagged plastic bags in the household trash for burial at the landfill. 
Objective 2) Provide guidelines for response to detection of new infection foci 
Strategy: Implement population reduction and sampling to determine prevalence 
Aggressive sampling in focal areas was conducted early in the CWD epidemic in Utah but has not been 
used as a tool since. If CWD is detected in new areas, strategies as outlined under objective 1 should be 
implemented, but in addition, an immediate response should also be considered on a case by case basis. 
A more aggressive approach should especially be considered especially in areas where CWD has 
previously not been detected, and that are located far from previous infection foci. 
Factors that may determine the strength of a response: 
o Distance to CWD positive areas 

===== PAGE 64 =====
64 
o Resident or migratory population 
o Connectivity or isolation to other populations 
o Size of the population 
o Current hunt management of the population 
o Presence of other cervid species 
o Presence of domestic cervid facilities (elk, reindeer, fallow deer) 
o Accessibility (private and public land) 
o Hunting opportunity for the public 
o Public perception of the proposed change or intervention 
o Location with respect to another positive area out of the State of Utah or tribal ground 
If CWD is detected within a new area, a feasible course of action should be determined by area biologist 
and wildlife managers based on factors listed above. 
Strategies to consider may include: 
o Immediate, localized reduction of population densities. 
o Immediate, intensive sampling in areas around the positive animal in order to determine CWD 
prevalences. 
o Immediate implementation of a late season hunt targeting older age class bucks. 
Objective 3) Communicate with the public and participate in scientific research. 
This objective will be reached through the following strategies: a) Communication with the public, and b) 
participation in relevant, applied research. 
a) Communication with the public: 
The UDWR is committed to providing the public with factual, timely and accurate information on the 
CWD prevalence, distribution, and management in the State. The Division will maintain an up to date 
website and release relevant information through other media outlets when necessary. The information 
provided will include where CWD has been found in the State, public health risks as determined by 
public health professionals, efforts to monitor the disease, links to laws and regulations pertaining to 
CWD, information on carcass import restrictions, and how the public can help minimize the spread of 
CWD. The UDWR will engage hunters in education about the disease transmission risks associated with 
baiting and feeding wildlife, using urine scents and lures, and harvest management to manage CWD 
prevalence in order to gain public support for any regulations and management actions that may be 
necessary. The location of hunter check stations, regional offices, and annual units for CWD surveillance 
will also be publicized on the CWD website and prior to the hunting season on social and other DWR 
media outlets. 
b) Participation in relevant, applied research: 
The Division will participate in applied research that is relevant for enhancing knowledge about CWD. 
Participation in relevant research projects will be decided and approved by UDWR on a case by case 
basis. 

===== PAGE 65 =====
65 
Literature cited: 
AFWA. 2018. Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies. AFWA best management practices for 
surveillance, management, and cotrol of chronic wasting disease (CWD). Available at: 
https://www.fishwildlife.org/application/files/9615/3729/1513/AFWA_Technical_Report_on_C 
WD_BMPs_FINAL.pdf. Accessed June 1, 2019. 
Almberg ES, Cross PC, Johnson CJ, Heisey DM, Richards BJ. 2011. Modeling routes of chronic wasting 
disease transmission: environmental prion persistence promotes deer population decline and 
extinction. PLoS One 6: e19896. 
Angers RC, Browning SR, Seward TS, Sigurdson CJ, Miller MW, Hoover EA, Telling GC. 2006. Prions in 
skeletal muscles of deer with chronic wasting disease. Science 311: 1117. 
Angers RC, Seward TS, Napier D, Green M, Hoover E, Spraker T, O’rourke K, Balachandran A, Telling GC. 
2009. Chronic wasting disease prions in elk antler velvet. Emerging Infectious Diseases 15: 696. 
Benestad SL, Mitchell G, Simmons M, Ytrehus B, Vikøren T. 2016. First case of chronic wasting disease in 
Europe in a Norwegian free-ranging reindeer. Veterinary Research 47: 88. 
CDC. 2018. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Chronic Wasting Disease. Available at 
https://www.cdc.gov/prions/cwd/index.html. Accessed June 1, 2019. 
Colorado Parks and Wildlife. 2018. Colorado Chronic Wasting Disease Response Plan. Available at: 
https://cpw.state.co.us/Documents/Commission/2018/Nov/Item_19-Chronic-Wasting-Disease-R 
esponse-Plan.pdf. Accessed May 31, 2019. 
Conner, MM, McCarty CW, Miller MW. 2000. Detection of bias in harvest estimates of Chronic Wasting 
Disease prevalence in mule deer. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 36: 691-700. 
Conner MM, Wood ME, Hubbs A, Binfet J, Holland A, Meduna LR, Roug A, Runge JP , Nordeen TD, Pybus 
MJ, Miller MW. 2021. The relationship between harvest management and chronic wasting 
disease prevalence trends in western mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) herds. Journal of Wildlife 
Diseases 57(4): 831-843. 
Czub S, Schulz-Schaeffer W, Stahl-Hennig C, Beekes M, Schaetzl H, Motzkus D. 2017. First evidence of 
intracranial and peroral transmission of Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) into Cynomolgus 
macaques: a work in progress. presentation at the PRION 2017 Conference, Edinborough, 
Scotland. https://www.youtube.com/embed/Vtt1kAVDhDQ. 
DeVivo MT, Edmunds DR, Kauffman MJ, Schumaker BA, Binfet J, Kreeger TJ, Richards BJ, Schätzl HM, 
Cornish TE. 2017. Endemic chronic wasting disease causes mule deer population decline in 
Wyoming. PLoS One 12: e0186512. 
Dohoo I, Martin W, Stryhn H. 2010. Veterinary Epidemiologic Research. VER Inc., Charlottetown, Prince 
Edward Island, Canada. 
Edmunds DR, Kauffman MJ, Schumaker BA, Lindzey FG, Cook WE, Kreeger TJ, Grogan RG, Cornish TE. 
2016. Chronic Wasting Disease drives population decline of white-tailed deer. PLoS One 11: 
e0161127. 
Fischer JR, Davidson WR. 2005. Reducing risk factors for disease problems involving wildlife. In: 
Transactions of the North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 81: 289. 
Geremia C, Miller MW, Hoeting JA, Antolin MF, Hobbs NT. 2015. Bayesian modeling of prion disease 
dynamics in mule deer using population monitoring and capture-recapture data. PLoS One 10: 
e0140687. 
Grear DA, Samuel MD, Langenberg JA, Keane D. 2006. Demographic patterns and harvest vulnerability of 
chronic wasting disease infected white-tailed deer in Wisconsin. Journal of Wildlife Management 
70: 546-53. 
Haley NJ, Hoover EA. 2015. Chronic wasting disese of cervids; Current knowledge and future 
perspectives. The Annual Review of Animal Biosciences 3: 305-25. 

===== PAGE 66 =====
66 
Haley NJ, Mathiason CK, Carver S, Zabel M, Telling GC, Hoover EA. 2011. Detection of chronic wasting 
disease prions in salivary, urinary, and intestinal tissues of deer: potential mechanisms of prion 
shedding and transmission. Journal of virology 85: 6309-18. 
Henderson DM, Denkers ND, Hoover CE, Garbino N, Mathiason CK, Hoover EA. 2015. Longitudinal 
detection of prion shedding in saliva and urine by chronic wasting disease-infected deer by 
real-time quaking-induced conversion. Journal of virology 89: 9338-47. 
Jennelle CS, Henaux V, Wasserberg G, Thiagarajan B, Rolley RE, Samuel MD. 2014. Transmission of 
chronic wasting disease in Wisconsin white-tailed deer: implications for disease spread and 
management. PLoS One 9: e91043. 
John TR, Schätzl HM, Gilch S. 2013. Early detection of chronic wasting disease prions in urine of 
pre-symptomatic deer by real-time quaking-induced conversion assay. Prion 7: 253-8. 
Kim TY , Shon HJ, Joo YS, Mun UK, Kang KS, Lee YS. 2005. Additional cases of chronic wasting disease in 
imported deer in Korea. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science 67: 753-9. 
Kong Q, Huang S, Zou W, Vanegas D, Wang M, Wu D. Yuan J, Zheng M, Bai H, Deng H, Chen K, Jenny AL, 
Rourke K, Belay ED. Schonberger LB, Petersen RB, Sy MS, Chen SG, Gambetti P . 2005. Chronic 
wasting disease of elk: Transmissibility to humans examined by transgenic mouse Models. The 
Journal of Neuroscience 25: 7944. 
Mathiason CK, Powers JG, Dahmes SJ, Osborn DA, Miller KV, Warren RJ, Mason GL, Hays SA, Hayes-Klug J, 
Seelig DM. 2006. Infectious prions in the saliva and blood of deer with chronic wasting disease. 
Science 314: 133-6. 
MaWhinney S, Pape WJ, Forster JE, Anderson CA, Bosque P , Miller MW. 2006. Human prion disease and 
relative risk associated with chronic wasting disease. Emerging Infectious Diseases 12: 1527-35. 
Miller M, Fischer J. 2016. The first five (or more) decades of chronic wasting disease. Transactions of the 
81st North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference. Available at: 
http://cwd-info.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/81st-NAWNRC-Transactions_FINAL-CWD-Exce 
rpt.pdf. Accessed June 1, 2019. 
Miller MW, Swanson HM, Wolfe LL, Quartarone FG, Huwer SL, Southwick CH, Lukacs PM. 2008. Lions and 
prions and deer demise. PLoS One 3: e4019. 
Miller MW, Conner MM. 2005. Epidemiology of chronic wasting disease in free-ranging mule 
deer: spatial, temporal, and demographic influences on observed prevalence patterns. Journal of 
Wildlife Diseases 41: 275–290. 
Miller MW. Williams ES, Hobbs NT, Wolfe LL. 2004. Environmental sources of prion transmission in mule 
deer. Emerging Infectious Diseases 10: 1003. 
Miller MW, Williams ES, McCarty CW, Spraker TR, Kreeger TJ, Larsen CT, Thorne ET. 2000. Epizootiology of 
chronic wasting disease in free-ranging cervids in Colorado and Wyoming. Journal of Wildlife 
Diseases 36: 676-90. 
Miller MW, Williams ES. 2004. Chronic Wasting Disease of cervids. Current Topics in Microbiology and 
Immunology 284: 193 - 214. 
Monello RJ, Powers JG, Hobbs NT, Spraker TR, Watry MK, Wild MA. 2014. Survival and population growth 
of a free-ranging elk population with a long history of exposure to chronic wasting disease. The 
Journal of Wildlife Management 78: 214-23. 
Nalls AV, McNulty EE, Mayfield A, Crum JM, Keel MK, Hoover EA, Ruder MG, Mathiason CK. 2021. 
Detection of Chronic Wasting Disease Prions in Fetal Tissues of Free-Ranging White-Tailed Deer. 
Viruses 13, 2430. 
Potapov A, Merrill E, Pybus M, Lewis MA. 2016. Chronic wasting disease: transmission mechanisms and 
the possibility of harvest management. PLoS One 11: e0151039. 
Race B, Williams K, Orrú CD, Hughson AG, Lubke L, Chesebro B. 2018. Journal of Virology 92, e00550-18; 
DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00550-18. 

===== PAGE 67 =====
67 
Rees EE, Merrill EH, Bollinger TK, Ten Hwang Y , Pybus MJ, Coltman DW. 2012. Targeting the detection of 
chronic wasting disease using the hunter harvest during early phases of an outbreak in 
Saskatchewan, Canada. Preventive Veterinary Medicine 104: 149-59. 
Sohn HJ, Kim JH, Choi KS, Nah JJ, Joo YS, Jean YH, Ahn SW, Kim OK, Kim DY , Bakachandran A. 2002. A case 
of chronic wasting disease in an elk imported to Korea from Canada. Journal of Veterinary 
Medical Science 64: 855-8. 
WAFWA. 2017. Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies. Recommendations for adaptive 
management of Chronic Wasting Disease in the west. WAFWA Wildlife Health Committee and 
Mule Deer Working Group. Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, and Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
Available at: 
https://www.wafwa.org/Documents%20and%20Settings/37/Site%20Documents/Committees/W 
ildlife%20Health/docs/CWDAdaptiveManagementRecommendations_WAFWAfinal_approved01 
0618.pdf. Accessed June 1, 2019. 
Walsh DP . 2012. Enhanced surveillance strategies for detecting and monitoring chronic wasting disease 
in free-ranging cervids: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2012–1036. Available at: 
https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/ofr20121036. Accessed June 1, 2019. 
Walsh DP , Miller MW. 2010. A weighted surveillance approach for detecting chronic wasting disease foci. 
J Wildl Dis 46: 118-35. 
Wasserberg G, Osnas EE, Rolley RE, Samuel MD. 2009. Host culling as an adaptive management tool for 
chronic wasting disease in white-tailed deer: a modeling study. Journal of Applied Ecology 46: 
457-66. 
Williams E. 2005. Chronic wasting disease. Veterinary Pathology 42: 530-49. 
Williams E, Miller M. 2002. Chronic wasting disease in deer and elk in North America. Revue scientifique 
et technique-office international des épizooties 21: 305-16. 
Williams E, Miller M. 2003. Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies in non-domestic animals: origin, 
transmission and risk factors. Revue scientifique et technique-Office international des épizooties 
22: 145-56. 
Wolfe LL, Watry MK, Sirochman MA, Sirochman TM, Miller MW. 2018. Evaluation of a test and cull 
strategy for reducing prevalence of chronic wasting disease in mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus). 
Journal of Wildlife Diseases 54: 511-519. 
